THE AUTONOMOUS CONTRACT
***********************

REFLECTING THE BORDERLESS ELECTRONIC-COMMERCIAL ENVIRONMENT IN CONTRACTING
==========================================================================

&#169; Ralph Amissah*

1. INTRODUCTION
---------------

  "Globalization is unstoppable. Even though it may be only in its early
  stages, it is already intrinsic to the world economy. We have to live with
  it, recognize its advantages and learn to manage it.

  That imperative applies to governments, who would be unwise to attempt to
  stem the tide for reasons of political expediency. It also goes for companies
  of all sizes, who must now compete on global markets and learn to adjust
  their strategies accordingly, seizing the opportunities that globalization
  offers."[^1]

At a national level, jurists as lawmakers over time magically create their own
reality, that is, the world in which they work, and are certified as
oracles.[^2] They are proud of their traditions in which they are specialists
and about which they tend to be protective. Commercial men as contracting
parties, with greater ease, instantaneously, through an expression of their
will, (by the wave of their pens, if not by mere incantations), can choose to
make any one of several alternative parallel worlds their reality. The various
dogmas and beliefs held as sacrosanct by individual sovereign legal parishes,
are not necessarily so hallowed by the business community.[^3] The fact that
the desired "law" may generally be selected by an expression of the will of the
parties, means that they can elect out of any of these fettered systems. This
paper is unsentimental about legal systems, its loyalty is placed elsewhere, in
the contract, and its ability to find solutions to the needs of the parties it
serves. An eminent economist has suggested that the study not of contract law,
but rather of contract practice is the key to understanding the economic
properties of contracting that are necessary to work out sensible uniform laws
for commercial purposes.[^4] That view is shared in this paper. However, even
within the frame of law and economics[^5] (to which only passing reference is
made in this paper) it is necessary to be mindful of the limitations of the
desirability of absolute freedom of contract.[^6] And to recognise the fact
that the international business community as a whole may benefit from a degree
of control over such freedom.[^7] This possibility is recognised by more modern
schools of law and economics such as the Institutional Approach.[^8]

<u>The autonomous contract</u> is a concept based on three ideas, that provide
lenses or perspectives with which to view the needs of the international
business community as they affect and are affected by a polymorphous set of
interrelated issues and areas of law: * (i) * / <u>The "autonomous contract" as
an expression of the will that "governs" international commerce</u> /. The
extensive freedom of contract granted the parties in international commerce,
ensures that the contract determines the nature of the business relationship
and most matters that govern it, including the "law" selected (subject to the
mandatory provisions of applicable governing law), and the means of dispute
resolution. In a real sense the contract is at the top of the hierarchy of
legal instruments that govern the parties' relationship. This ensures that the
selection of "law" and means of dispute resolution is a market driven affair
that will be based on their ability to provide the parties with the greatest
utility. / Contractual autonomy as a function of freedom of choice in the
global economy /. * (ii) * / <u>The "autonomous contract" as seeking the means
to transcend national boundaries</u> /. Economic activities have become
increasingly global and the "law" that provides for them should do so in the
same dimension. The quest is to find or achieve a uniform legal order that is
preferably delocalised, transcends state boundaries, provides cross-border
transparency and world-wide effect.[^9] This idea is discussed in relative
terms, the more transnational and transcending of state law, the greater the
uniformity achieved, or the more a-national the "law", the more autonomous the
resulting contract.[^10] Areas of particular interest are: uniform substantive
rules of law; uniform interpretation of such rules and the contract; and the
global enforcement of decisions. / Seeking a foundation for contract that is
more autonomous of individual states, with the aim of attaining greater
efficiency, consistency and predictability in international business
transactions, and thereby, insofar as it is possible, to transcend the
relevance of borders /. * (iii) * / <u>"The autonomous contract" designed to be
virtually self-contained and "self-governing"</u> /. The contract could become
a transnational medium of regulation onto itself, being designed as a one-stop
reference, containing all the material required for its functioning, governance
and the resolution of any disputes arising under it. Technology of the
electronic age together with developments in international law would allow a
contract to be incorporated and presented together with all material that was
to have a binding authoritative effect in relation to it, (excepting the
mandatory law).[^11] / The self-contained autonomous contract as one possible
solution to the efficient achievement of global predictability /.

The practicability and utility of an "autonomous contract" (e.g. one founded in
a-national law) is dependent on its ability to serve the international business
community as a suitable risk management tool and to result in improved
transaction costs. Much discussion is focused on the underlying supportive
structure for contracting and how a predictable and efficient means of
contracting world-wide might be achieved. There is a relationship (sometimes
co-operative at others competitive) between the efforts of interested
international organisations and governments to provide services to the
international business community on which they can choose to base the substance
of their contracts and the resolution of disputes arising thereunder. Given the
scope of the subject matter of the paper, only a broad outline and general
framework can be developed. The discussion though occasioned by and made more
current by the nature and growth of electronic-commerce, is a broader one that
holds true for all contracts that have a transnational aspiration and as such
is of general relevance to international commerce. The wider frame is adopted
under the assumption that solutions should, as far as possible, be technology
neutral. <u>Section 2</u> of this paper looks at the various means available to
the international business community to cope with the multitude of states in
which they conduct business. It suggests a correlation between the search to
establish reliable internationally uniform business methods and having greater
autonomy from state law. The autonomous contract in the second sense, seeking
the means through greater autonomy of individual state to reflect a desired
borderless transnational environment in contracting. <u>Section 3</u> looks at
the difficulty in achieving predictability in international disputes, which is
a requisite for commercial contract planning, and which all legal orders,
especially those that are autonomous of state, must satisfactorily cope with if
they are to succeed. <u>Section 4</u> looks at possible alternative ways of
improving uniform predictability and/or efficiency of dispute resolution, that
would result in greater autonomy or lead to the further transcending of state
law.

2. IN SEARCH OF AUTONOMY
------------------------

The business community engaged in international commerce has had to find ways
to cope with the high degree of legal uncertainty brought about by the crossing
of numerous legal systems whose rules are expressed in a multitude of
languages. This section discusses the business community's search to reduce the
relevance of borders and attain greater uniformity for their contracts by
various means, including basing their contracts on a-national law and reliance
upon international commercial arbitration for the resolution of disputes that
may arise. Methods employed to reduce the legal relevance of borders include /
inter alia /:

* (1.a) * Use of standard contracts. * (1.b) * Reference to uniform principles
and rules. * (2.a) * Choice of law of an acceptable state.[^12] * (2.b) *
Choice of law of a state applying relevant uniform laws. * (3) * Choice of
jurisdiction of an acceptable state.[^13] * (4.a) * Recourse to international
commercial arbitration (ICA) which gives the greatest effect to the will of the
parties, and provides the most extensive regime for enforcement. * (4.b) * In
ICA excluding the application of the law of any sovereign state - through
application instead of / lex mercatoria / or the like - the rules and
principles of the international business community. * (5) * Use of
self-regulating constitutional contracts that attempt to internalise all
aspects of the parties' relationship, e.g. a long-term joint venture which may
or may not be designed so as to result in the establishment of a separate
company (Shell is such a company). * (6) * Large multinationals which are
vertically and horizontally integrated in their production and provision of
services across national boundaries are able to arrange their transactions
internally within the corporate structure to a large extent avoiding the need
for contract law and practice. Examples 5 and 6 are related to corporate
structuring and are outside the scope of this paper.

The contract is a formal tool used by the business community to structure their
relations, for which business practice and economics suggest the importance of
a predictable and efficient underlying legal framework. However, any kind of
legal regulation is a potential source of unpredictability. The transnational
nature of international business provides an additional dimension to the
difficulty of securing these requirements. The predictability of business
relations is dependent on such aspects of "law" as the predictable
interpretation and construction of legal texts, and the global recognition and
enforcement of the dispute resolution judgement or award. Predictability and
efficiency, which may be roughly equated to risk management and transaction
costs, can be enhanced through the establishment and use of uniform "laws",
rules and principles, insofar as they result in reduced complexity. The
"autonomous contract" in the three senses of the concept, if directed towards
these ends by the business community suggests various means to secure these
collective ends for the international business community. A more autonomous
basis for contract is already given support by relevant international
institutions (and states competing for international business) that take into
account the needs of the business community, signalled by their choices (of law
and legal framework).

2.1 THE DIMINISHING ROLE OF STATES
..................................

The paradigmatic concept of law and model of legal order is still that of the
sovereign state.[^14] National systems, for all their shortcomings, tend to
consistently apply themselves in a way that becomes publicly known to the
relevant legal community, and allows for the predictable structuring of
relations. However, members of the international business community are not
well served by having to employ lawyers in each country in which they operate
to provide specialist advice on similar areas of law[^15] and are in a constant
search for ways around these obstacles. There are a number of ways in which
this paradigm is being broken down in the sphere of international commerce. *
(a) * At one level the concept of law of the nation state is eroded through
action of the states themselves, by their implementation of uniform laws (both
at an international and regional[^16] level). This may be the result of a state
wishing to modernise its law, or recognising the limitations of a fractal
international legal order and wishing to facilitate trade by simplifying their
relationship to it. This is typically done by working through international
institutions to achieve substantive uniformity in a particular area of
commercial law. The result of this being that individual state law becomes less
important. * (b) * With modern substantive uniform law, states are increasingly
called upon to bind themselves and their judiciaries,[^17] to take account of
the "international character" of the uniform law and "the need to promote
uniformity in international trade." In spite of the formidable problems
associated with achieving uniformity of application of such uniform laws in the
judiciaries of different states acting independently of each other, this
obligation further internationalises state law. * (c) * Perhaps more
importantly, the contract regulatory order represented by the laws and
judiciary of the sovereign state, has a significant competitor that is arguably
much better suited to the needs of transnational commerce, in the package
represented by the many forms of international commercial arbitration. * (d) *
States, in accepting the preference of the international business community,
play a further essential role in giving support to the framework required by
arbitration for it to function effectively. This in fact is carried further as
competition exists on a state level as regards providing national arbitration
laws that attract arbitration.[^18] * (e) * Most important and underlying this
advance has been the granting of full effect to the "will" of contracting
businessmen. Through freedom of contract in commercial affairs, states have
provided parties with comprehensive autonomy in the organisation of their
commercial affairs, with the exception of course of mandatory law. If state law
does not suit the demands of the business community, they are free to go
elsewhere. Businessmen can and do limit the role of the state in their
contractual relations, seeking more globally applicable and uniform solutions.
Responding to this demand there are various international institutions and
service providers that are sensitive to the needs of the business community
that increasingly target the contracting parties as representing an alternative
means of unifying "law" and providing global solutions.

2.2 SOLUTIONS AVAILABLE WITHIN NATIONAL LAW
...........................................

2.2.1 UNIFORM LAW AND ITS LIMITATIONS
.....................................

Selection of the law of a municipal system that applies uniform law is one
important step that can be taken within the framework of municipal law, to make
the contract more autonomous. The comments in this paper will be restricted to
uniform substantive law, in the form of conventions that are to be adopted and
applied in a uniform manner at an international level.[^19] Several other
approaches to reaching various levels of uniformity exist.[^20] The model law
approach for example, is based on ensuring that the law of different countries
has a similar recognisable structure and essential elements. This is used where
structural similarity is desirable but uniformity is not essential,[^21] or
where the achievement of greater uniformity would prove difficult or impossible
due to differences in national law. Also discussed in this paper are
"restatements" of law, in the form of general principles of contract, with the
/ UNIDROIT /[^22] / Principles of International Commercial Contracts /,[^23]
providing a prominent current example.

* / The CISG as a uniform law example / *

  "Can clear, predictable international law be made from the divergent rules of
  dozens of domestic legal systems, rules built with local idioms for which
  there are no equivalent terms in other languages? The answer, unhappily, is
  no, but that is not the end of the story."[^24]

The greatest success for the unification of substantive commercial contract law
to date, has been by / UNCITRAL /[^25] with respect to the sale of goods in the
/ Vienna Sales Convention / (/ CISG /).[^26] The / CISG / is currently applied
by 49 states, commonly estimated as representing two-thirds of world trade. It
may be regarded as the culmination of an effort in the field dating back to
Ernst Rabel,[^27] followed by the Cornell Project,[^28] and connected most
directly to the / UNIDROIT / inspired / Hague Uniform Law for International
Sales / (/ ULIS / and / ULF /),[^29] the main preparatory works behind the /
CISG /.

The development and formulation of uniform law takes time, as does the
formulation of uniform principles and rules. Unlike principles and rules,
however, for uniform law to come into force and to be applicable, must go
through a long process of ratification and accession by states. Even where
states implement uniform law they frequently do so with various reservations.
Success that is by no means guaranteed, takes time. For every uniform law that
is a success, there are more failures. Even where there is widespread use of a
uniform law, there are usually as many or more states that are exceptions. The
implementation of uniform law is however, not the end of the story, as
immediately the question of its uniform application arises. This is a
fascinating subject that is of central importance to the development of
autonomy, both within and outside the framework of municipal law.

  "If / UNCITRAL / manages to become accepted by the whole world in any domain
  of the law or a set of rules, one believes that the problem of conflict of
  laws will be eliminated in this field, but this is not the case. A
  counter-effect enters into the picture. The uniform law from the very moment
  of its coming into operation starts to differ from itself. Every judge in
  every country is a sovereign interpreter of the text, and the judge became a
  judge by learning the system of law of his own country. And as the speediest
  bird is unable to fly out of itself, so the judge is unable to forget the law
  that he has learned. Divergent or contradictory interpretations, like the
  application of rules of different countries, lead to different
  judgements"[^30]

We shall return to the problem of uniform application, under that heading and
in the context of seeking means of achieving solutions to the problem of
predictability. It should be noted here however, that uniform law does not
cover all aspects of the relationship between the contracting parties, its
scope is defined.[^31] Relevant applicable and mandatory law continues to
apply.

2.2.2 UNIFORM RULES AND PRINCIPLES
..................................

We include in this category, rules and principles governing specific aspects of
the contractual relationship, [^32] negotiated standard contracts, and more
comprehensive negotiated standard contracts drafted by international
institutions[^33] and trade associations.[^34] In addition to these are the
newcomers in the form of comprehensive general contract principles or contract
law restatements that create an entire "legal" environment for contracting.
Standard rules and principles provide greater flexibility, and have one clear
advantage over uniform law in their being contractually agreed, and thereby, as
Honnold put it "becoming effective by a stroke of the pen of the parties
concerned."[^35] Amongst the reasons for their use is the reduction of
transaction cost, "parties often want to close contracts quickly, rather than
hold up the transaction to negotiate solutions for every problem that might
arise",[^36] and they satisfy risk management criteria, being known, tried and
tested, their effects being predictable. Furthermore uniform principles allow
unification on matters that at the present stage of national and regional
pluralism could not be achieved at a treaty level. Take for example the
question of "interest", which is a politically sensitive issue in some
countries, though largely accepted by the business community, and compare the
provision in the / CISG / with that of the / UNIDROIT International Contract
Principles /.[^37] Such provisions are extremely useful to have for clarity,
and may be varied if unacceptable to the contracting parties. With the /
UNIDROIT /[^38] and / EU /[^39] / Contract Principles /, we have contract law
restatements, that is, standard rules and principles of contract that create
what is close to an autonomous (complete and independent) environment for
contracting. This is so even where selected in conjunction with the law of a
sovereign state whether in the context of litigation or arbitration. We shall
return to consider the / UNIDROIT International Contract Principles / in the
context of international commercial arbitration where it is possible to achieve
even greater autonomy.

2.2.3 SITUATION SPECIFIC STANDARD CONTRACTS
...........................................

Standard contracts may attempt to be autonomous in themselves, but seldom are,
having a limited scope of regulation and depending for their ultimate
interpretation and gap filling on the applicable "law". This type of standard
contract is more often than not drafted unilaterally by a single firm that
represents a particular contractual interest. These are too diverse for much of
a general nature to be extracted for our current purposes, being specific to
the business that prepares them and to the type of goods or services for which
they provide.

2.3 A TRANSNATIONAL REGULATORY ORDER FOR CONTRACTS
..................................................

Within the traditional municipal order a limited degree of autonomy is
available in contract. Autonomy is here used in the sense of reducing the
relevance of specific national laws. This is achieved as discussed through: the
selection of the law of a state that applies uniform law; the use of uniform
rules and principles; and/or the use of negotiated standard contracts. There
are problems however, with state's judiciaries' limited ability to disengage
themselves from their traditional legal process, methods of legal reasoning,
use of sources, and interpretation of uniform law, principles, rules and
contracts. In addition to these there are problems associated with the
enforcement of claims in other states world-wide as required for international
commerce. These constraints have long represented a hindrance to the business
community that has sought and found a preferable solution in international
commercial arbitration. This may be further enhanced through the selection of
a-national law as the governing law of the contract under arbitration, such as
/ lex mercatoria /. This a-national regulatory order is made possible by: * (a)
* States' acceptance of <u>freedom of contract</u> (/ odre public / or public
policy excepted). * (b) * Sanctity of contract embodied in the principle /
<u>pacta sunt servanda</u> /. * (c) * Written contractual selection of dispute
resolution by <u>international commercial arbitration</u> - / ad hoc / or
institutional, usually under internationally accepted arbitration rules. * (d)
* Enforcement: arbitration where necessary borrowing the state apparatus for
<u>law enforcement through the / New York Convention</u> on Recognition and
Enforcement of Arbitral Awards 1958 /. * (e) * Greater transnational effect is
achieved through the exclusion of state law as governing the contract. Usually
substituting the choice of general principles of law or / <u>lex mercatoria</u>
/ as governing the contract, or calling upon the arbitrators to act as /
amiable compositeur / or / ex aequo et bono /. For increased predictability
preferably through application of the / UNIDROIT Principles /.

2.3.1 INTERNATIONAL COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION (ICA)
................................................

It appears accepted that ICA has become the most prevalent means of dispute
resolution in international commerce.[^40] This is hardly surprising as ICA is
a cornerstone of the autonomous contract, and unlike litigation survives on its
merits as a commercial service to provide for the needs of the trading
community. As such ICA adheres more closely to the rules of the market economy,
responding to those needs and catering for them more adequately. It has
consequently been more dynamic than the national courts, in adjusting to the
changing requirements of modern world trade.[^41] ICA, in taking its mandate
from and giving effect to the will of the parties, provides them with greater
flexibility and frees them from many of the limitations of municipal law. As
examples of this, it seeks to give effect to the parties' agreement upon: the /
lex mercatoria / as the law of the contract; the number of, and persons to be
"adjudicators"; the language of proceedings; the procedural rules to be used,
and; as to the finality of the decision. ICA through state support provided by
the / New York Convention / (and where implemented by the / UN Model Law / on
ICA) grants international commercial contracts an unparalleled enforcement
apparatus world-wide.[^42] Much that has been essential to the success of ICA
has been contributed by the activities of international organisations, both
governmental[^43] and non-governmental,[^44] in providing the necessary legal
infrastructure for arbitration in the form of international legal instruments
and the dissemination of information about their application on a world-wide
basis. There are multitudes of papers and publications dedicated to ICA.[^45]

Note: Arbitration under the World Bank supported / ICSID Rules /[^46] is of
special importance for investment disputes involving a state which is a
contracting party to the convention. / ICSID / arbitration (which is beyond the
scope of this paper) is binding and enforceable without appeal even on the
grounds of public policy, and has an even wider global range of enforceability
than is available to ICA under the / New York Convention /.

2.3.2 LEX MERCATORIA - AND ITS ESSENTIAL LINK TO ARBITRATION
............................................................

  "The / lex mercatoria / has sufficient intellectual credentials to merit
  serious study, and yet is not so generally accepted as to escape the
  sceptical eye."[^47]

  "Let me just note that in Europe the / lex mercatoria / is a fact.
  Arbitrators apply it and those courts which have faced awards applying it
  have accepted its application."[^48]

  "Arbitrators entrusted with the task of settling a dispute in accordance with
  the intention of the parties and without recourse to any national legal
  system usually find themselves in a rather challenging situation. However, it
  is widely recognised as a matter of fact that arbitrators are not so
  reluctant to apply a-national and less definite systems of rules agreed upon
  by the parties as their colleagues from a state judiciary, who are more
  concerned with legal technicalities than with the desire to find a solution
  in a way contemplated by the parties at the time of conclusion of the
  contract.[^49] Obviously that can also explain the reason why arbitrators of
  differing nationalities who have applied the / lex mercatoria / in collegiate
  arbitral tribunals have not experienced great difficulties in reaching
  consensus."[^50]

The concept of / lex mercatoria /: of an autonomous set of rules and practices
accepted by the international business community as regulating their
transactions, has been actively promoted by a number of eminent authorities,
mainly in continental Europe, and has continued to gain in stature over the
years.[^51] The concept has developed particularly in conjunction with ICA,
identified by Clive Schmitthoff of England and advanced by such authorities as
Berthold Goldman of France and Pierre Lalive of Switzerland. Under current
legal thinking, most national courts still require a contract to be governed by
a national legal system,[^52] although on this front also / lex mercatoria /
advances.[^53] ICA is not so constrained. It has been suggested that / lex
mercatoria / was being used in as many as 5-10% of ICA cases.[^54] Ole Lando
identified 1985 as the landmark year when the / UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration / in Article 28(1) allowed for arbitral
disputes to be determined "in accordance with the rules of law as chosen by the
parties".[^55] This clarification is welcome, though hardly revolutionary.[^56]
It has long been accepted that arbitrators in executing their mandate derived
from the will of the parties, if so requested, will settle the dispute on non
legal grounds, in equity or on the merits, acting as / amiable compositeur / or
/ ex aequo bono /.[^57] Given that ICA is decided according to "the will" of
the contracting parties, it was open earlier for an a-national (autonomous)
decision based on / lex mercatoria / by specification of its application
together with the rules of equity.[^58] This would have fallen under the
accepted provisions of the earlier recognition and enforcement of arbitration
rules. It appears to be accepted that <u>when agreed by the parties in ICA</u>,
/ lex mercatoria / may be applied as a separate legal frame independently of
national law (mandatory law apart), and that such decisions will be enforced as
valid by national courts.[^59] Equally, if so instructed, both in arbitration
and in national courts, / lex mercatoria / may be called upon to play a gap
filling function for the selected applicable national law. / Lex mercatoria /
is a polycentric and integrative concept that has eluded precise definition,
its precise nature, scope, content and application being vague, with wide
latitude granted arbitrators.[^60] It has been suggested that "there can at
most be no universal / lex mercatoria /, but merely a variety of / lex
mercatoria / systems depending on sector or region."[^61] It has been pointed
out that / lex mercatoria / is a distinct concept from harmonisation and
transnationalism.[^62] There is a convergence however, if one takes the
perspective of the businesss community's needs and goals. The business
community usually refers to / lex mercatoria / by what are regarded as loose
synonyms, in such phrases as "internationally accepted principles of law
governing contractual relations", that more clearly indicate the intent behind
their subscription to it.[^63]

Some reservation must be expressed to their unconsidered use based on the
uncertainty they represent. Amongst the items of which the / lex mercatoria /
has grown to be comprised of,[^64] in a not necessarily hierarchical manner,
are: * (a) * Customs and usages[^65] of international trade. * (b) * Relevant
rules promulgated by international institutions on the area of law concerned -
/ ICC - Incoterms /, or the / Uniform Customs and Practices for Documentary
Credits /. * (c) * The rules and principles common to all or most states
engaged in international trade, or to those states which are connected to the
contract. Apart from individual principles and rules for given circumstances,
this includes uniform law such as / UNCITRAL's CISG /. The following quotation
is of interest as regards general principles constituting / Lex Mercatoria /:

  "Distilled from a vast literature, these general principles have been
  enumerated by Lord Justice Mustill as (in abridged form):[^66] (1) / Pacta
  sunt servanda / (contracts should be enforced according to their terms); (2)
  / Rebus sic stantibus / (substantially changed circumstances can entail a
  revision of contract terms); (3) / Abus de droit / (unfair and unconscionable
  contracts should not be enforced); (4) / Culpa in contrahendo /; (5) Good
  faith / [and fair dealing] /; (6) Bribes render a contract void or
  unenforceable; (7) A state may not evade its obligations by denying its own
  capacity to make an agreement to arbitrate; (8) The controlling interest of a
  group of companies is regarded as contracting on behalf of all members; (9)
  Parties should negotiate in good faith if unforeseen circumstances arise;
  (10) "Gold clause" agreements are valid and enforceable; (11) One party may
  be released from its obligations if there is a fundamental breach by the
  other; (12) No party can be allowed by its own act to bring about a
  non-performance of a condition precedent to its own obligation; (13) A
  tribunal is bound by the characterisation of the contract ascribed to it by
  the parties; (14) Damages for breach of contract are limited to the
  foreseeable consequences of the breach; (15) A party which has suffered a
  breach of contract must mitigate its losses; (16) Damages for non-delivery
  are calculated by reference to the market price of the goods and the price at
  which the buyer has purchased equivalent goods in replacement; (17) A party
  must act promptly to enforce its rights, lest lose them by waiver; (18) A
  debtor may set off his own cross-claim to diminish his liability to a
  creditor; (19) Contracts should be construed according to / ut res magis
  valeat quam pereat /; (20) Failure to respond to a letter is regarded as
  evidence of assent to its terms."[^67]

(d) In the absence of the above the arbitrators will apply or establish the
rule which appears to them to be best suited to the situation. (e) In ICA also
relevant is the public policy of the country in which the award is likely to be
requested.[^68] (f) Recently the definition of / lex mercatoria / has been
greatly if controversially assisted, by comprehensive international rules made
for this purpose by / UNIDROIT / and the Commission on European Contract Law.

2.3.3 CODIFIED GENERAL CONTRACT PRINCIPLES AS / LEX MERCATORIA /
................................................................

  "The unification of law has ceased to be the prerogative of State
  legislators.... The hope of all of us who believe in the necessity of a
  flexible and pluralistic approach to the international unification of law, is
  that this equilibrium will be maintained in future."[^69]

  "In offering the / UNIDROIT Principles / to the international legal and
  business communities, the Governing Council is fully conscious of the fact
  that the / Principles /, which do not involve the endorsement of governments,
  are not a binding instrument and that in consequence their acceptance will
  depend on their persuasive authority."[^70]

  "The objective of the UNIDROIT Principles is to establish a balanced set of
  rules designated for use throughout the world irrespective of the legal
  traditions and the economic and political conditions of the countries in
  which they are to be applied. This goal is reflected both in their formal
  presentation and in the general policy underlying them."[^71]

The precise contents of "the general principles of law" and of / lex mercatoria
/ have always been vague and obscure, and presented the arbitrator who was to
apply them with something of a challenge.[^72] This is changed by reference to
the / UNIDROIT International Contract Principles / or / European Contract
Principles / as the proper law of the contract.[^73] They provide a
comprehensive set of rules to govern contractual relations and may be regarded
as contract law restatements, although it has been pointed out that it is not
for these principles to advance themselves as / lex mercatoria /.[^74] Given
our global perspective, we shall confine ourselves to the / UNIDROIT Principles
/, which were more international in their formulation and purpose.[^75]

The arrival of the / UNIDROIT International Contract Principles / was
particularly timely. It coincided with the successful attempt at reducing trade
barriers represented by the / World Trade Agreement /, and the start of the
general use of the Internet,[^76] which has allowed for the exponential growth
of electronic commerce, and has further emphasised its transnational nature.
This is all the more opportune bearing in mind that it takes years to prepare
such a legal instrument. The / UNIDROIT Principles / were contemplated in 1971,
a steering committee was formed composed of René David, Clive Schmitthoff and
Tudor Popescu to make a study into the feasibility of such a project. Their
first report in 1974 stressed the importance of the project laying down the
broad outlines for its structure. In 1980 a special working group was
constituted, "members of the Group, which included representatives of all the
major legal and socio-economic systems of the world, were leading experts in
the field of contract law and international trade law... all sitting ... in a
personal capacity, and not expressing the views of their governments."[^77] The
first edition of the / UNIDROIT Principles / were finalised in 1994, 23 years
after their first conception, and 14 years after work started on them in
earnest. The / UNIDROIT Principles / constitute a system of principles and
rules that govern most aspects of contractual relations. They were drawn up
after consideration of different legal systems, but such influence has been
deliberately obscured, with the intention and instruction that the / UNIDROIT
Principles / should be interpreted according to an autonomous international
standard. The only earlier set of rules to which reference is made within their
commentary being the / CISG /.[^78] Nevertheless they have been met with
certain reservation, especially as regards their relationship to / lex
mercatoria /. It has been expressed on the one hand that:

  "It is not up to the / Principles / to advance themselves as general
  principles of law or as / lex mercatoria /. As general principles of law the
  / UNIDROIT / text will only be accepted when the legal community and not
  merely the some twenty drafters of the / UNIDROIT / text, no matter how
  skilled and reputed these lawyers may be, has recognised that the / UNIDROIT
  / document states principles which underlie most legal systems and are
  generally accepted. In fact some / UNIDROIT / rules are certainly too
  specific to be perceived as such. The / UNIDROIT / standards will only be
  part of the / lex mercatoria / if they are recognised as such by the business
  community and its arbitrators. Since the / UNIDROIT Principles / have just
  been launched, it is too early to assess this possibility."[^79]

Or again that:

  "No one doubts of course that the principles are the brainchild of learned
  lawyers who laboured independently. All the same is it not somewhat
  pretentious to claim that the principles represent the generally accepted
  principles of law?" ... "For the time being, the / UNIDROIT Principles /
  remain no more than a learned codification."[^80]

And it has been suggested that an indication of the traditional / lex
mercatoria / is only firmly established by these codified principles where the
three new systems represented by the / CISG / the / UNIDROIT Principles / and /
EU Principles / converge.[^81] Be these objections as they may, the / UNIDROIT
/ (and / EU /) / Principles / as contract law restatements cater to the needs
of the business community that seeks an a-national or transnational law as the
basis of its contracts. Where in the past they would have been forced to rely
on the ethereal and nebulous / lex mercatoria /, the business community is
finally provided with the opportunity to make use of such a "law" that is
readily accessible, and has a clear and reasonably well defined content. As
such the / UNIDROIT Principles / allow for more universal and uniform
solutions. Their future success will depend on such factors as: * (a) *
Suitability of their contract terms to the needs of the business community. *
(b) * Their becoming widely known and understood. * (c) * Their predictability
evidenced by a reasonable degree of consistency in the results of their
application. * (d) * Recognition of their potential to reduce transaction
costs. * (e) * Recognition of their being neutral as between different nations'
interests (East, West; North, South). At the present time the / UNIDROIT
Principles / have to overcome the deterrent fact that they are relatively new
and untested. Their content, which needs to be known for their practical
application, is as yet unfamiliar. Their suitability for various tasks has not
yet been fully ascertained. And the workings of many discretionary powers
granted the arbitrators have not yet been observed much in practice.

There are those within the business community who point out that "any
pretension to interfere from the outside, through the imposition of uniform
legislation, would be inopportune and in any case doomed to failure."[^82] In
this regard, the / UNIDROIT Principles / advancing themselves as a matter of
choice for the parties do not constitute such an imposition.

/ The UNIDROIT Principles / require study and understanding for their effective
use in contracting. * (a) * The / UNIDROIT Principles / are broad in scope
covering most aspects of contract and as such create a largely autonomous
uniform legal environment for contracting. Exceptions are mandatory law, and
some validity issues including capacity. These occur in a minority of
disputes.[^83] * (b) * The / UNIDROIT Principles / adhere to the principle of
freedom of contract, but contain mandatory provisions, that parties voluntarily
choosing to use them cannot contract out of. * (c) * They are to be understood
not on their own but in conjunction with their commentary. * (d) * The /
UNIDROIT Principles / cover most aspects of contract including chapters on:
formation, validity, interpretation, content, performance, and non-performance.
The section on formation also covers pre-contractual negotiations. * (e) * The
standards applied are meant to be international and may be different from
similar domestic standards - e.g. good faith and fair dealings "in
international trade."[^84] * (f) * The / UNIDROIT Principles / contain separate
provisions for the interpretation of the text of the / UNIDROIT Principles /
themselves (Article 1.6), and those of the contract to which they apply
(Chapter 4). * (g) * Most of the / UNIDROIT Principles / can be regarded as
"default rules" that save the parties the time and cost "of negotiating and
drafting by providing rules that they would probably have agreed upon had they
taken the time to do so."[^85] * (h) * An important consideration is that these
rules are drafted specifically to take into account the needs of international
trade, and as such contain provisions specifically directed at such matters as:
determination of price; currency of payment; government permissions to perform;
liquidated damages; interest rate on money due; reference back to original
language text of a contract in case of doubt. * (i) * Unlikely to be familiar
to those used to contract law models based on / caveat subscriptor /, are a
number of protective principles, including those of good faith and fair
dealing, and loyalty, which are discussed briefly later in this paper. * (j) *
There are also rules which (in contrast with the regular acceptable default
rules) serve rather the role of inducing the parties to negotiate more suitable
terms for their transaction.[^86] * (k) * In yet other areas the rules are
extremely general such as the hardship provision and other works on standard
rules may provide more suitable solutions. [^87] * (l) * The / UNIDROIT
Principles / contain many discretions, that arise from their nature as
principles, and use of standards within them (such as reasonable) that are
without specific meaning, the content of which depends on the context in which
they are applied. [^88] * (m) * One might additionally observe that the /
UNIDROIT Principles / can be used in conjunction with more specific rules and
regulations. Of particular interest in the sale of goods, the / UNIDROIT
Principles / are suitable for use (on the contracting parties' election[^89])
together with the / CISG / to fill gaps in the provisions of the / CISG /.
Provisions of the / CISG / would be given precedence over the / UNIDROIT
Principles / under the accepted principle of / specialia generalibus derogant
/.[^90] The / CISG / has many situations that are not provided for at all, or
which are provided for in less detail than the / UNIDROIT Principles /.
Examples include: the deliberately excluded validity (Article 4); the provision
on interest (Article 78); impediment (Article 79), and; what many believe to be
the inadequate coverage of battle of forms (Article 19).[^91]

As to the suitability of The / UNIDROIT Principles / for complex international
contracts, there are differing views. As pointed out forcefully by Vivian
Gaymer:

  "In relation to the complex type of contracts, I have to say that if the
  parties are content that the contract would be governed by a well-developed
  existing law which has been found to be satisfactory in relation to similar
  contracts in the past they would be unlikely even to consider using the /
  Principles /. The reasons are obvious. Parties like to know where they stand.
  They like to have access to an existing body of expert advice. / The
  Principles /, for the time being at least, suffer from the disadvantage of
  novelty. The lawyers seem to be resistant to change."[^92]

Paradoxically, where governments are involved (in complex agreements), they not
infrequently find it necessary to resort to an a-national order to govern the
contract. Kazuaki Sono before the promulgation of the / UNIDROIT Principles /
writes:

  "For complex transactions which were seldom heard of in the past, there is a
  tendency to have resort to "the general principle of law", / lex mercatoria
  /, or "the principle of good faith and fair dealing" particularly through
  arbitration clauses. During the Congress, I have been told personally from a
  reliable source that 5 to 10 per cent of the disputes which are submitted to
  arbitration now contain such clauses. The person who provided me with this
  information said "only 5 to 10 per cent", but to me it is an extremely
  significant percentage. Yet, the contents of these principles are still far
  from certain."[^93]

In such situations selection of the / UNIDROIT Principles / should provide a
welcome increase in clarity. [^94] Their use where states participate in
international contracts is likely to generally boost confidence in their use
for more complicated agreements also within the business community.

2.3.4 PROTECTIVE PRINCIPLES AS A NECESSARY PART OF / LEX MERCATORIA /
.....................................................................

The virtues of freedom of contract are stressed in this paper in that they
allow the international business community to structure their business
relationships to suit their needs. The protective principles of good faith and
fair dealing are of particular interest as in the / UNIDROIT Principles / they
are mandatory and place an encumbrance on this freedom. Other protective
principles such as loyalty also absent from some traditional contract systems
are of similar interest. It has been pointed out however, that it is necessary
to be mindful of the limitations of the benefits of absolute freedom of
contract. The mandatory protective principles may be justified in that they (on
the balance) reflect the collective needs of the international business
community. It may be further and more positively argued that they are in fact
beneficial and facilitate trade. * (a) * The protective principles help bring
about confidence and foster relations between parties. They provide an
assurance in the international arena where parties are less likely to know each
other and may have more difficulty in finding out about each other. * (b) *
They better reflect the focus of the international business community on a
business relationship from which both sides seek to gain. * (c) * They result
in wider acceptability of the principles within both governments and the
business community in the pluralistic international community. These protective
principles may be regarded as enabling the / Principles / to better represent
the needs of "/ the Commonwealth /" (here used to mean the world as a whole). *
(d) * Good faith and fair dealing are fundamental underlying principles of
international commercial relations. More generally, freedom of contract
benefits from these protective priciples that need mandatory protection from
contractual freedom to effectively serve their function. One might suggest that
for most types of international contract based on a-national law, this is the
minimum price of freedom of contract that should be insisted upon by mandatory
international law, as the limitation which hinders the misuse by one party of
unlimited contractual freedom. They appear to be an essential basis for
acceptability of the autonomous contract (a-national contract, based on agreed
rules and principles). As mandatory principles they become the default standard
for the conduct of international business and as such may be looked upon as
"common property." Unless mandatory they suffer a fate somewhat analogous to
that of "the tragedy of the commons."[^95]

Modern contract "law" models lay greater emphasis on the contract as an
expression of co-operation between the parties.[^96] Both the / UNIDROIT
Contract Principles / and the / EU Contract Principles / display these modern
features. They include protective principles such as good faith and fair
dealing, loyalty, and hardship[^97] that will not be as familiar to those used
to the traditional contract model[^98] though they will be more familiar to
others. These may be justified as co-operative rules and principles to which
members of the international business community are prepared to subscribe in
order to be able to assume the same of others. Being able to make these
assumptions may facilitate trade, by allowing for greater trust between parties
that are in less of a position to know of or find out about each other, than
would be the case in a domestic transaction. Good faith and fair dealing, also
identified by the English Lord Justice Mustill as part of "The" / Lex
Mercatoria /,[^99] is a pervasive and fundamental underlying principle common
to both the / UNIDROIT / and / EU Principles /.[^100] The loyalty principle
means that a party cannot take a completely singular view of its own interests
to the exclusion of the other, having in some circumstances to take account of
those of the other party.

Conversely, it is instructive to question the role in international commerce of
the traditional contract represented by English contract reasoning and
inherited by the British Commonwealth. Based on freedom of contract, / pacta
sunt servanda / and / caveat subscriptor /. Although claimed to be neutral in
making no judgement as to the contents of a contract, this claim is misleading.
It is based on free market arguments that parties best understand their
interests, and the contract arrived at will be an optimum compromise between
their competing interests. It not being for an outsider to regulate or evaluate
what a party of its own free will and volition has gained from electing to
contract on those terms. This approach to contract is adversarial, based on the
conflicting wills of the parties, achieving a meeting of minds. It imposes no
duty of good faith and fair dealing or of loyalty (including the disclosure of
material facts) upon the contracting parties to one another, who are to protect
their own interests. The traditional model's failings are known in the domestic
and international arena, frequently producing contractual relations that take
advantage of the weaker, and less informed party.[^101] Information presents
particular problems in international commerce.[^102] Adherents to the / caveat
subscriptor / model, point to the fact that parties have conflicting interests,
and should look out for their own interests. However, as compared with domestic
transactions the contracting parties in international commerce are less likely
to possess information about each other or of what material facts there may be
within the other party's knowledge, and will find it more difficult (and
costly) to acquire. And as Michael Trebilcock put it: "Even the most committed
proponents of free markets and freedom of contract recognise that certain
information preconditions must be met for a given exchange to possess Pareto
superior qualities."[^103] Furthermore the more information one already has,
the less it costs to identify and to obtain any additional information that is
required.[^104] This suggests that some parties will be in a much better
position to determine and access what they need to know, a factor that should
be reflected in the application of the principle.[^105] It is also increasingly
accepted that it is not possible to fix long-term contracts once and for all,
without future adjustments, as the traditional model would suggest. Also of
interest are the claims of those who point out that this method of contracting
is out of step with the reality of what businessmen do when entering an
agreement. Ian Macneil[^106] suggests that contract has become an unrealistic
abstraction, there being no solidarity except in legal remedies, with
reciprocity absent except in the case of the discrete transaction. And it has
been pointed out that business-persons at the time of contracting look not to
their rights and remedies, but to the success of the business
relationship.[^107] Modern contract models in placing greater emphasis on
co-operation between the parties, and recognising a distinction between
procedural and substantive fairness, go some way towards redressing these
objections and arguably better reflect the ideology and needs of the
international business community, notwithstanding such other issues as risk
allocation.

The area represented by protective provisions generally, placing a limitation
on freedom of contract, is a large and complicated one, which beyond these
comments is outside the scope of this paper.[^108]

Caveat: Contract law is not built on one model, but on several competing
ones.[^109] Protective principles, though they may be widely suited for most
types of contract, may be persuasively argued against for others. Protective
principles may for example be generally suited for trade in goods and services
or use in joint venture agreements, (which may benefit from their tendency to
foster trust between international business contracting parties). However, they
are less certain suit the needs of financial agreements and some specialist
contract areas.

2.4 THE AUTONOMOUS CONTRACT - AN A-NATIONAL SOLUTION, A SUMMARY
...............................................................

The autonomous contract, in the sense of one based on an a-national, autonomous
order, is possible both in form and substance where based on ICA and / lex
mercatoria /, with the mandatory law of states excepted. The mandatory law
exception referring principally to the laws of states in which performance is
to be made or awards are to be enforced. This arrangement can be provided with
greater predictability through application of the / UNIDROIT Principles /. This
model provides the potential to reduce transaction cost through the possibility
of adherence to a uniform acceptable standard that can be applied across
borders with minimal concern as to the underlying municipal legal
structure.[^110] This presupposes the functional and substantive predictability
of the a-national "law" based contract. Functional predictability appears to
have been provided, ICA being better catered for on a world-wide basis than the
national legal order, having secured for itself an unparalleled regime for the
recognition and enforcement of awards.[^111] Discussion might focus on how much
could usefully be adopted in ICA from the / ICSID / approach to arbitration.
The issue is much more complicated where substantive predictability is
concerned. The simple answer would appear to be, to accept a degree of
uncertainty, as being in the nature of legal reasoning. Parties should perhaps
look more to a reasonable solution based on the application of the relevant
rules and principles, as many parties do. With this in mind there is nothing to
prevent the updating of the / UNIDROIT Principles / periodically in the light
of experience of their use. The principals are analogous to the / US
Restatement of Contract Law /, which is periodically updated, as are / ICC's
Incoterms / and / Uniform Customs and Practices / and even the / FIDIC Red Book
/ on construction. Occasional updating would allow the / UNIDROIT Principles /
to keep pace with developments and should not fall foul of the point raised by
Jérôme Huet:

  "However, if the / UNIDROIT Principles / were to be modified, corrected or
  improved they might also finally be rejected. This is because, even if one
  believes in the merits of "soft law" which is often more effective than
  written law, it remains that any law must be known and accepted. There must
  be sufficient time to get used to it. In other words it must be reasonably
  stable, and not be a 'changing law'".[^112]

The commentaries could be updated with greater frequency (than the black letter
text of the / UNIDROIT Principles /) in the light of experience. So doing
should allow for adjustments in the text that assist in ensuring the more
uniform application of the principles. The question however remains as to how
such predictability might be improved for an a-national legal order.

3. THE PROBLEM OF PREDICTABILITY
--------------------------------

However parties contractually structure their relations there is always the
question of the interpretation of their contract and any "law" on which it is
based whether municipal, uniform law, or rules and principles. The question is
how to achieve the uniform application of uniform "law" and legal texts. It is
necessary to understand the nature of the problem in order to discuss the
viability of and to seek ways of achieving: uniform international contract law;
an autonomous contract order; and the autonomous contract (in the third sense
used in this paper) as a possible solution. Note that much in this section is
an overview related to problems regarding the unification of international
law.[^113] it examines the nature of the problem of achieving a uniform global
"legal" platform on which to base the autonomous contract and the problems
associated with attaining a high degree of predictability for international
commerce. Consider the following passage by Ole Lando:

  "I believe that in many arbitrators, as in many lawyers, there are two
  conflicting attitudes. One wishes the law to be a perfect and stringent
  system of rules under which the good lawyer can always find the true and only
  solution. To apply the law is the same as to apply the theorems of
  mathematics. This will produce certainty and predictability for the citizen.

  The other attitude tells the arbitrator that absolute predictability is not
  attainable. Each legal system has many gaps and the most provident legislator
  cannot close them all. Nor can he prevent new gaps from arising when social
  conditions change. No legal system provides certain solutions to all
  problems. Even the best lawyer in the most highly-developed country is often
  in doubt. Besides, predictability is only one of several legal values. Rules
  which create certainty also tend to bring about rigidity. They do not
  consider special circumstances and changing conditions. The legal process is
  not and can never be a mere syllogism. It is above all an effort to reach the
  most fair and appropriate decision. In this process which is often inventive
  the arbitrator will weigh the possible solutions against each other and make
  his choice." [^114]

Uniform "law" has the potential to reduce transaction costs and increase
world-wide predictability in international commerce. However, the success of an
autonomous uniform international regulatory order is tied to its ability to
provide for the risk management needs of the business community and has proved
to be one of the most challenging, fascinating, and enduring problems. The
selection of uniform laws and uniform rules is not enough, as this does not
ensure their uniform application, without which the purpose of establishing
uniform law is largely defeated. Pragmatically the issue of predictability may
be regarded as one of degree. "Uniformity of application" is closely related to
the "predictability" of a legal text and although not identical, their use has
at times been interchanged in this writing. What degree of uniformity is
necessary or acceptable in the ordering of relations, and what trade-offs are
there in achieving or attaining this predictability? There is clearly a tension
between certainty and flexibility - "rules which create certainty also tend to
bring about rigidity."

Some comments may be made on the decision-making process and discretion in
relation to rules and principles. An attempt to base a legal system on rules
alone would create gaps. Discretion is required, which is applied through
principles of law, which are more holistic constraining legal standards. Ronald
Dworkin[^115] appears to distinguish them in two ways. * (i) * Whereas a rule
is either applicable or not, principles do not operate in this all or nothing
way, having a dimension and weight, they can apply to varying extents. * (ii) *
Rules cannot conflict, either they apply or they do not, whereas principles may
conflict with each other.[^116] Some principles will be more pervasive than
others.[^117] Their relative importance may vary according to the circumstances
in which they are to be applied. The work of the legal craftsman being to know
when and how they are to be applied in a given factual situation, according to
the different considerations and relationships between particular conflicting
circumstances, and in so doing arrive at the "correct" legal solution.

3.1 PREDICTABILITY AT A MUNICIPAL LEVEL
.......................................

Complete predictability in a legal or regulatory regime is not attainable -
this is a charge that can be levelled against all legal systems including those
of sovereign states. At a national level the nature of legal reasoning and
application of particular rules of law and principles is understood by its
practitioners, and certified by supreme authority. Consider the comment of John
Honnold:

  "Perfect clarity and predictability in law, as most of you know all too well,
  is not for this world ... Nevertheless, within a single domestic system it
  usually has been possible to keep uncertainty within tolerable limits so that
  nearly everyone prefers law to anarchy."[^118]

This issue is important enough to merit special consideration. * (i) * Ignoring
evidentiary problems, total predictability is unattainable even at a domestic
level where we are confined to the workings of legal reasoning, without
admitting the possibility of extraneous influences. The nature of the
decision-making process, in this case, in the application of rules and
principles with various sources of law for appropriate guidance[^119] has all
the hallmarks of a highly complex system, indeed in the nature of the
chaoplexic.[^120] The fact that decisions stem from deterministic processes
does not mean jurists can predict all their meanderings. The application of
simple deterministic axioms[^121] to subtly differing sets of circumstance can
lead to complex results that often cannot be predicted with certainty. Simple
sets of principles and rules applied give rise to extremely complicated
patterns that never quite repeat themselves. * (ii) * Even within a single
national jurisdiction, whether or not they should, extraneous influences will
play a role in the decision-making process. There will be differences in the
basic ideologies and beliefs of the adjudicators, and these will sometimes have
an effect on the decision-making process. The diversity of basic ideology,
views and politics accepted within a democracy, together with the different
social, economic and cultural backgrounds of adjudicators guarantee a
difference in their basic assumptions that cannot be excluded from playing a
role in their application of discretion and in the weighing of principles. Even
Dworkin's super-judge Hercules is not unaffected. In a democracy accepting the
pluralism of views, there is no single set of background characteristics that
may be used to define such a being.

3.2 UNIFORMITY AT AN INTERNATIONAL LEVEL
........................................

Absolute predictability does not exist at a purely domestic level. These
problems are compounded in the context of the application of a uniform law by
different judiciaries.

  "Even within a common set of rules and concepts, the habits of mind of
  lawyers in different legal systems, no doubt reinforced by rules of civil
  procedure, are too deeply ingrained to achieve practical uniformity in
  approach ... the instinct of civil lawyers is to turn to rules contained in
  the code, whereas English lawyers turn principally to the terms of the
  contract. The difference between legal systems about what constitutes a good
  argument, what has intellectual strength and integrity, will prove hard to
  abolish..."[^122]

Adjudicators (especially within national courts) are faced with formidable
compounded complexity where attempting to apply a uniform law in a uniform
manner, that will frequently prove difficult to satisfactorily overcome, even
where assuming that there is no problem of access to information. These are a
consequence of their different legal traditions, which have different technical
rules of procedure, rely on different sources for authority and respect
different reasoning as legally sound. (There are also additional extraneous
influences resulting from their different cultures and ideologies).

3.2.1 THE / UN CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES /
..................................................

Where dealing with uniform law, the way of discovering the rights and duties of
contracting parties is by its interpretation, and that of the parties'
contract. Herbert Briggs in / The Law of Nations; Cases, Documents and Notes
/[^123] on the interpretation of treaties states:

  "Practically all treatises on international law have sections on the
  so-called 'canons of interpretation' of treaties. Analysis reveals that the
  canons consist largely of the application of the principles of logic, equity,
  and common sense to the text of a treaty in an endeavour to discover its
  'clear' or 'natural' meaning."

The / UN Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969 / (in force 1980) is considered
to be a codification of existing public international law with regard to the
interpretation of treaties.[^124]

The relevant articles on interpretation are Article 31 and 32. Article 31
instructs that a "treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with
the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of its object and purpose." Article 32 instructing that
reference be made to its / travaux préparatoires / and circumstances of its
conclusion to confirm the meaning resulting through application of Article 31,
and resolve any ambiguity, or that which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
Article 31(2) takes into account agreements made by the parties as to its
interpretation on the conclusion of the treaty. Article 31(3)(a) and (b)
instruct the taking into account of any subsequent agreement between the
parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions, including that which is evidenced by a practice in its application
by the parties; Article 31(3)(c) makes any relevant rules of international law
applicable in the relations between the parties; Article 31(4) states that the
application of a special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established
that the parties so intended.

3.2.2 INTERPRETATION CLAUSES WITHIN UNIFORM LAWS
................................................

  "The more successful the activities of / UNCITRAL /,[^125] "the more it
  extends its activities in the field of international trade relations, the
  more necessary the uniform interpretation of the uniform rules will be."
  [^126]

Modern uniform laws and principles increasingly contain their own
interpretation clauses, which increasingly provide for the taking into account
of their international character, and the need to promote uniformity in their
application. [^127] The / CISG / provision on interpretation - Article 7:

  (1) In the interpretation of this Convention, regard is to be had to its
  international character and to the need to promote uniformity in its
  application and the observance of good faith in international trade.

  (2) Questions concerning matters governed by this Convention which are not
  expressly settled in it are to be settled in conformity with the general
  principles on which it is based or, in the absence of such principles, in
  conformity with the law applicable by virtue of the rules of private
  international law.

The / UNIDROIT Principles / provision on the "interpretation and
supplementation of the Principles" - Article 1.6:

  (1) In the interpretation of these Principles, regard is to be had to their
  international character and to their purposes including the need to promote
  uniformity in their application.

  (2) Issues within the scope of these Principles but not expressly settled by
  them are as far as possible to be settled in accordance with their underlying
  general principles.

Most scholarly writing to date has centred on the / CISG /, though much of the
discussion there holds true generally for all uniform law. It is instructive to
read Honnold's text / Uniform Words and Uniform Application /,[^128] prepared
with input from 16 professors to get an idea of the dimension of the problem
faced, as seen through the eyes of scholars representing each of the major
legal systems. The professors agreed that to achieve the uniform application of
texts it was necessary to look at writings in other jurisdictions, and to look
beyond the traditional national sources and methods of interpretation. They
also agreed that this was a Convention duty imposed upon Contracting
States.[^129] Relevant sources were identified as: * (a) * The legislative
history. * (b) * Rulings world-wide. * (c) * The official and other
commentaries. * (d) * Scholarly writings. However, perhaps not surprisingly,
despite such forward thinking as to how uniformity might be achieved, success
so far has been limited and a number of questions have been raised. Where a
particularly novel solution is employed by a court, is it to be followed
elsewhere? Where a solution thought to be inappropriate is adopted, is this to
be followed, must it be distinguished, or can it simply be ignored? If there is
much text generated on a particular uniform law, how much is it necessary to
cover, and what should be approached first and what relative weight should be
given the different sources? Courts will still have a tendency to look first to
domestic decisions and writings. In one sense ICA with an international
arbitral panel provides a better balance in having a more international
perspective as to how the uniform law should be applied. This will allow
arbitrators to reach a reasonable conclusion in the circumstances, taking into
account their multi-national perspective of the uniform law. Such a method of
reaching a reasonable decision, though more flexible, has its measure of
predictability where the approach is understood. It may be what a significant
proportion of the international business community that chooses ICA are after.
A distinction is to be made between world-wide predictability in application,
and predictability on a national scale. Where national law is applied by its
national court "A" that looks first to its domestic writings, it may have a
clear - predictable manner of application, even if not in the spirit of the
Convention. Another nation "B", may apply the uniform law in a different way
that is equally predictable, being perfectly consistent internally. This
however defeats much of the purpose of the uniform law. The court of nation
"B", applying the national law of state "A", is much more likely to take
seriously the treaty obligation undertaken by that state,[^130] and much the
same is the case where a nation fails in its Convention obligations as to its
implementation of a uniform law.[^131] The question both as regards the
adoption of uniform substantive law, and attempting to achieve its uniform
application is not so much whether or not a country has a perfectly good and
modern contract law tradition, and should definitely not be whether it is felt
that the effort could be improved upon. The question should be how far is it
possible to end up with a common understanding and application of a uniform
text, so as to achieve a uniform and predictable law, at as international a
level as possible, and thereby facilitate international commerce by simplifying
it.

Among the solutions levelled at the problem is the greater dissemination of
information, including making use of information technology to ensure that
writings are commonly known world-wide. Efforts have been started by / UNCITRAL
/, / UNIDROIT / and some academic institutions.[^132] But assuming successful
updating and dissemination of relevant international texts, if much writing is
generated, whether in the form of decisions or literature, there is an
information management challenge. What does one look at, if one has to be
selective, and in any event, what weight should be given to any given legal
writing?[^133] And according to whose legal methodology and practice should
they be applied? And the question, is this really the best way to promote the
development of uniform law?

4. ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS
------------------------

Whoever is able to provide the business community with the solutions it is
seeking, in an acceptable way, has a reasonable chance of being subscribed to.
Keep in mind: * (i) * the business community's interest in greater efficiency
and predictability in the uniform and if possible transnational application of
"law" and uniform texts; * (ii) * the business community's lack of focus on
national law as a goal / per se /, increased autonomy from state law being
acceptable and in fact desirable if successfully able to further the mentioned
goals, and; * (iii) * the business community's ability through freedom of
contract to take advantage of what is made available to them.

However a question does arise as to whether the ability to create alternative
solutions and even an independent / lex / is or should be without limits. The
present author is of the opinion that the duties of good faith and fair dealing
and loyalty (or an acceptable equivalent) should be a necessary part of any
attempt at the self-legislation or institutional legislation of any contract
regime that is based on "rules and principles" (rather than a national legal
order). If absent a requirement for them should be imposed by mandatory
international law. As discussed in section 2.3.4 such protective provisions are
to be found within the / UNIDROIT / and / EU Contract Principles / on good
faith and fair dealing, and loyalty.

4.1 INDEPENDENT SUPRA-NATIONAL INTERPRETATION TRIBUNALS
.......................................................

A radical approach has been proposed,[^134] to have states accept an
independent supra-national interpretation tribunal, to whom questions of an
international commercial character concerning a uniform law would be referred
for clarification, and whose rulings would be followed under a / droit commune
/.

  "[O]nly a fundamental methodological change would have a chance to reduce the
  gap between the slow pace of international legislation and the requirements
  of the modern world, especially in the field of international trade. He
  suggested that States should agree, by way of a general Convention, to accept
  rules established by the Commission, or under its auspices as a body of
  common law (/ droit commune /)."[^135]

This suggestion was advanced on more than one occasion at early sessions of /
UNCITRAL / where it drew respectful attention but little enthusiastic
support.[^136] A mitigation might be to give such a tribunal only persuasive
authority.[^137]

  "As Professor Don King also indicated, a need may soon be felt for the
  establishment of a global court of commerce initially for those cases where
  resort has been made in arbitration to a national / lex mercatoria / or to
  general principles of contract law. At this Congress, we already heard a
  suggestion of Professor Sohn for the establishment of an international
  tribunal to interpret uniform texts."[^138]

To date the political will backed by the financing for either such organ has
not been forthcoming. In 1992 the / UNCITRAL / Secretariat's conclusion was
that "probably the time still has not yet come".[^139]

4.2 AUTHORITATIVE REVIEWS AS CO-ORDINATING GUIDES
.................................................

A less radical possibility is that there might be some body charged with (or
that charges itself with) the task of reviewing important developments in
relation to uniform texts over the course of time, and giving their
authoritative, or persuasive opinion on the issue as to the right course to be
taken in future. This might be an international body of scholars formed by the
institution concerned, or in some other manner acceptable to legal counsel of
the international business community, that reviews the decisions and writings
made over the year and makes recommendations as to the future course that
should be taken by others in the interpretation of the text. This could
alternatively be pursued as an international interdisciplinary research effort
(involving legal academics and practitioners, economists, business schools, and
representatives of the business community) that is co-ordinated by a central
institution.

If pursued through the original formulating agency, this could be done as a
periodic update to a relevant commentary such as that of the / UNIDROIT
Principles /, which could be updated in light of the experience that has been
gained from the application of the text. Again this would be able to take
advantage of the opportunities offered by information technology. Alternatively
an independent authoritative guide on uniform application could be published
annually (as a complete text). However organised, and whether by integral
commentary update, or independent guide, provided the publication is reputable
and acceptable to the business community it has a number of attractive
features. The parties in their contract could specifically refer to the
commentary or guide, together with the black letter text, as the primary source
of regulation and means of interpretation of the uniform "law" in dispute
resolution.

4.3 LIMITING OF SOURCES FOR INTERPRETATION
..........................................

This suggests the possibility of another approach to the problem of
unpredictability of uniform application. Given the mentioned problems, serious
consideration should be given to the fact that improved predictability and
efficiency may be better achieved by limiting of sources to be applied for the
purpose of interpretation. What might such an alternative solution be? In
attempting to achieve the uniform transnational application of a uniform text
it is most efficient to look for answers as far as possible within the text
itself, and if there is one, in the commentary or guide. An argument may be
made for leaving the rest largely to the discretion of arbitrators. Part of the
appeal of the / UNIDROIT Principles / is that they may be regarded (at the
parties' election) as largely self-contained and that they allow for the
arrival at efficient reasonable resolutions of disputes. The parties may wish
to rely on the substantive text and accompanying commentary or guide to the
greatest possible extent, and to restrict external sources for their
interpretation in the interests of efficiency - achieving this "at the stroke
of a pen". This to the common law lawyer is unfamiliar territory.[^140]
Predictability in most circumstances may be increased by reduced complexity in
knowing where to look, the parties having a uniform, clear and concise idea of
what there is to be aware of on the issue. Transaction cost should be reduced
as a result, in knowing that there is a single set of transnational uniform
rules and principles, and a limited amount of text to be ploughed through. This
would represent the further rise of pragmatism over legal technicalities.

Robert Hillman writing on Article 7 of the CISG (contemporaneously with the
writing and presentation of this paper) makes the following observations, that
are of general relevance to harmonisation efforts, and with which the present
author is in full agreement as suggesting the sensible approach and way
forward:

  "Professor Honnold suggests that decisions construing the Convention and
  secondary analysis will also clarify the significance of focusing on the
  "international character" of the Convention. In fact, most authorities have
  called for the publication of cases construing the Convention to increase the
  potential for its uniform application. The problem with this approach is that
  a high reliance on cases may create the impression that they are the primary
  source of international sales law and that the Convention's principles are
  inadequate. Such an environment may encourage tribunals not only to take
  their eyes off the principles but to engage in distinguishing, overruling,
  and even manipulating precedent. Lawyers from common-law states may feel
  comfortable with these activities, but they do not offer much promise if the
  goal is to achieve uniformity and certainty in the international sales law.
  Perhaps most worrisome, de-emphasizing principles may encourage tribunals
  facilely to turn to domestic cases, expressly or implicitly, when
  interpreting and gap-filling under Article 7. Analysts should therefore urge
  tribunals to try to find answers within the four corners of the Convention
  and to look to cases only in the unusual case where the Convention does not
  supply adequate guidance."[^141]

In addition to original texts, international supra-national bodies or
acceptable third parties might produce works on interpretation which, if not
overly voluminous, and if they become generally known and recognised, could
provide a particularly efficient way of reducing transaction costs and
achieving sufficient predictability. Relying upon the reasonable resolution of
the dispute by an arbitrator directed to use these specific sources as
authority for reaching the decision.

4.4 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS - TRANSNATIONAL HARMONISING INFORMATION
AND KNOWLEDGE-BASES
..............................................................................

There can be no doubt that the information potential of information technology
will play a vital role in this process. As a tool what is most valuable is its
potential to make instantly available large volumes of information if required
(from anywhere on the globe). At the most basic level tremendous potential is
provided for comparative study of developments around the world with regard to
uniform law texts - academic writings, court decisions. However, its most
exciting potential is realised when designed for transnational harmonisation.
There is every possibility to adopt the approaches discussed in section 4.1-4.3
combined with an educational aspect (section 4.6). One possibility is the
development of specialist sites dedicated to particular uniform law texts, that
attempt to catalogue and manage information regarding international
developments, and in so doing implicitly or explicitly recommend and provide a
guiding hand as to how it should be interpreted and applied. Such "databases"
dedicated to the task of international harmonisation would serve more than
"data". Such use of information technology appears over time to offer the best
chance of altering the orientation and focus of the world's legal communities
in the way necessary to achieve the internationally uniform application of
uniform texts and more generally to achieve greater harmonisation of
international trade law.

4.5 E-CONTRACT SOLUTIONS?
.........................

The electronic environment provides possibilities for designing standard
contracts that are virtually self contained and self-governing. The contract
together with an entire / Lex / can easily be stored on electronic media -
illustrated by the possibility of storing relevant portions of such databases
as / Lexis /, / Westlaw /, or / Lovdata / on "disk". The parties may confine
themselves to their electronic contract, which contains or incorporates all
sources of regulation and their interpretation in a convenient one-stop
location, including / inter alia /: all relevant conventions, principles, rules
and standard terms on which it is based, together with relevant commentaries
and contractually authorised sources of authority (copyright problems apart).
Having relevant material easily available from a single source is of some
interest, however, the idea in itself is only of marginally greater interest
than what is made possible by the use of one of the large commercial law
databases.[^142] The real value of such a concept arises where the electronic
contract (as a one-stop solution) is designed to meet the "objective" of the
business community for a relatively straightforward transnational and uniform /
Lex /, (see Section 2.4) that is of a limited textual dimension, (see Section 4
and 4.1 - 4.4). It was suggested that limiting the sources for the
interpretation of uniform texts might be a better way to achieve uniformity
than seeking to know and distinguish all that has been decided on point
internationally.

In the electronic contract further steps could be taken in the design of the
contract so as to limit the necessity to look elsewhere. Several issues that
might not usually be agreed in advance could be covered, including procedural
ones, such as the manner and amount of discovery in the event of a dispute. In
creating an environment for the parties, it could also be used as a means of
broaching some differences between civil law and common law approaches. There
are numerous other possibilities, the contract could for example become part of
a standard software utility program (being incorporated into a standard model
regulatory order, based for example on the structure outlined within this
text). Such a contract, even if agreed at a specific point in time, is likely
to be more dynamic. It could guide the parties during contractual negotiations
as to some of the more important factors to consider. On having entered a
contract it could assist the parties in determining the nature and timing of
their relative obligations. For longer term and more complex agreements, part
of the contract directed towards the parties goals could be designed to have
interactive logistical functions. It could make use of live data from specified
sources - that is continually updated. "appendices" to the electronic contract
could record submitted logs of performances of the parties. The parties may be
guided to use electronic communication for third party conciliation and
mediation, before the more serious step of adversarial dispute resolution
through ICA.

Beyond this the imagination is the only limitation as to what might technically
be done. Drawing back to the more mundane, but essential in today's world, the
standard electronic contract could have country specific profiles that might
include such details as the status of electronic documents and signatures, and
relevant country specific details and peculiarities.

A standard electronic "autonomous contract" could provide greater control, and
further simplify the parties' contractual environment. Given that this would be
the result of the parties' contractual freedom there is no need to suggest that
this would be the only or best solution, only that it should be workable, and
should have potential if pursued.

* / Note on the validity of electronic documents and signatures / *

  "Contract law is one of Rome's most important contributions to legal history.
  Yet, Watson (The Evolution of Law) writes, it is / prima facie / astonishing
  that the Romans never developed a written contract that would take its place
  by the side of / stipulatio / as a second contract form. Stipulation required
  the presence of both parties and was oral. A written contract could have been
  negotiated at a distance and would have been easier to prove. The Romans knew
  that written contracts had been standard and useful in classical Athens. But
  the idea of / stipulatio / as the contract form had become so ingrained in
  the Roman legal mind that the option of using an alternative form simply was
  not adopted."[^143]

For most purposes but not all and in most jurisdictions though not all,
contracts may be entered into without regard as to form: orally, in writing, or
by conduct. It being possible, where necessary, to adduce evidence as to the
existence and contents of an agreement. In some cases however, an agreement
must be in writing, as for example in the case of an arbitration agreement for
its recognition and enforcement under the / New York Convention /.[^144]
Needless to say, for such purposes, acceptance of the validity of electronic
documents is essential for truly electronic contracting and commerce. For
electronic contracting to be borderless and effective globally such acceptance
of validity should be world-wide. Some states including some "modern" European
ones do not recognise the validity of electronic documents or electronic
signatures, however well authenticated and free from the possibility of
tampering they may be.[^145] / The UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce
1996 / addresses these and other issues related to electronic commerce. In the
interest of a global rather than regional solutions, it makes sense that states
give electronic commerce the support it needs by adopting the / Model Law / or
by enacting laws that are in conformity with it. The guiding principle, here to
be applied to writing on paper or electronically, that is found in the / UN
Model Law on Electronic Commerce /, is suggested by the / US Framework for
Global Electronic Commerce / (1997):

  "rules should be technology-neutral (i.e., the rules should neither require
  nor assume a particular technology) and forward looking (i.e., the rules
  should not hinder the use or development of technologies in the
  future)"[^146]

This in a sense is a rejoinder to the Roman favouring of oral over written
contracts, which today sounds backward, but in fact is no less so than the
blanket non-acceptance of electronic writing and signatures regardless of
suitable authentication and verification possibilities. Beyond these
observations on the need for electronic documents to be held valid for
electronic commerce, the discussion in this paper is generic to international
commerce. Under the current diverse national orders, however, it is necessary
to know the requirements of individual state laws to ensure the validity of
electronic contracts where a contract is required to be in writing, and if in
doubt to resort to paper.

It may be observed that the business counterparts are least cognisant of
location in transactions that can be carried out entirely within the electronic
world, such as trade in intangibles, money transfers, services, many areas on
intellectual property; whereas trade in tangibles, including goods and most
types of investment include a physical (off-line) component.

4.6 EDUCATION
.............

  "... one should create awareness about the fact that an international
  contract or transaction is not naturally rooted in one particular domestic
  law, and that its international specifics are best catered for in a uniform
  law."[^147]

Within the framework described in this section, education and sensitivity to
the needs of the business community by the legal profession and academia would
appear to be a necessary part of any solution. However, while the business
community seeks and requires greater uniformity in their business relations,
there has paradoxically, at a national level, been a trend towards a
nationalisation of contract law, and a regionalisation of business practice.
[^148] As Pierre Lalive points out quoting Roy Goode: "The undeniable fact is
that, in most countries today, the part played in a student's / curriculum / by
what I would call 'non-national' subjects (ie public and private international
law, comparative law, international trade law and the like) has steadily
diminished over the years, paradoxically, at the very time when everyone can
observe and should know that the world is becoming more and more
international." [^149] The disparity grows worse today. Legal education has
become more local as a result of the considerable domestic and regional
legislation passed. Textbooks and studies, to cope with the increased material,
have had to concentrate on taking a domestic and regional approach with little
space to spare for an international perspective, or for comparative
study.[^150] This is regarded by many as unfortunate, especially given the long
experience with fruitful international communication in the area of
international trade law.[^151] Finding means to transcend national boundaries
is also to continue in the tradition of seeking the means to break down
barriers to legal communication and understanding. In 1966, a time when there
were greater differences in the legal systems of states comprising the world
economy Clive Schmitthoff was able to comment that:

  "22. The similarity of the law of international trade transcends the division
  of the world between countries of free enterprise and countries of centrally
  planned economy, and between the legal families of the civil law of Roman
  inspiration and the common law of English tradition. As a Polish scholar
  observed, "the law of external trade of the countries of planned economy does
  not differ in its fundamental principles from the law of external trade of
  other countries, such as e.g., Austria or Switzerland. Consequently,
  international trade law specialists of all countries have found without
  difficulty that they speak a 'common language'

  23. The reason for this universal similarity of the law of international
  trade is that this branch of law is based on three fundamental propositions:
  first, that the parties are free, subject to limitations imposed by the
  national laws, to contract on whatever terms they are able to agree
  (principle of the autonomy of the parties' will); secondly, that once the
  parties have entered into a contract, that contract must be faithfully
  fulfilled (/ pacta sunt servanda /) and only in very exceptional
  circumstances does the law excuse a party from performing his obligations,
  viz., if / force majeure / or frustration can be established; and, thirdly
  that arbitration is widely used in international trade for the settlement of
  disputes, and the awards of arbitration tribunals command far-reaching
  international recognition and are often capable of enforcement abroad."[^152]

As suggested in the passage quoted earlier by Lalive and Goode and underlined
by the discussion throughout this paper, an increased attention to
international commercial law and arbitration is merited in the law student's
curriculum. Efforts by a number of institutions aimed at enriching student
awareness, education and experience in this respect, through the arrangement of
such international inter-collegiate activities as arbitration moots and essay
competitions are commendable. Equally so are various international commercial
law oriented Internet efforts that are of value to researchers and
practitioners alike.[^153]

5. SUMMARY
----------

This paper has discussed a number of interrelationships, themes, problems and
possible solutions that arise from its premises, perspective, and framework, as
set out in summary form in the introduction. It highlights the need for lawyers
world-wide to foster a genuine international approach to their thinking,
method, practice and solutions with regard to international commercial
contracting and law. The conduct of business world-wide is increasingly
transnational. It demands that the legal community keep abreast of and cater
for these needs. Efforts to find solutions to should similarly focus on a
transnational and harmonising direction. The discussion in this paper
concentrates on various aspects that are raised in consequence of this with
regard to: the legal framework available for the international business
community; problems related to further transnationalisation; and some possible
solutions. It is not, however, a mere matter of choice for the legal community
to decide whether or not to take an interest in this increasingly evident
phenomena. The international business community has the power to find ways to
meet their needs through the expression of their choice in the exercise of
their contractual freedom. In using this power they exert influence on the
conduct of the legal community in a manner which ensures that these needs are
eventually satisfied. The business community subscribes to the legal framework
and services provided by those sensitive to their needs. Those less sensitive
are marginalised and eventually persuaded of the need to adapt. The results
that would be achieved by absolute freedom of contract, however, are not
necessarily the most ideal for the business community as a whole. As such it is
necessary to be mindful of the limitations of contractual freedom and
legislators should give recognition to this need as well.

6. ENDNOTE
----------

* Lectures on private law aspects of international trade at the Faculty of Law,
University of Tromsø, Norway, and created / ITL - International Trade Law
Monitor / <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/> or <http://tradelaw.net/> off
which a large number of the (black letter) legal texts referred to in this
paper are available.

Thanks are due to Albert Kritzer, the Executive Secretary, Institute of
International Commercial Law, Pace University School of Law and Petri
Keskitalo, Research Fellow, Faculty of Law, University of Troms&oslash;, for
reading and commenting on this text in its preparatory stages. The views
expressed here and any remaining errors are my sole responsibility.

URLs are occasionally provided as references. These are subject to change
without notice.

 [1]: Maria Livanos Cattaui, / The global economy - an opportunity to be seized /
 in / Business World / the Electronic magazine of the International Chamber of
 Commerce (Paris, July 1997) at <http://www.iccwbo.org/html/globalec.htm>

 [2]: Tangential support for the simile from Hans Petter Graver, / "Den
 juristskapte virkelightet og juristrollen" / in Jussens Venner (1986) p.
 314-324.

 [3]: René David suggests the primary constraints on development are
 "conservatism, routine, prejudice and inertia" cited by the / UNCITRAL
 Secretariat, The Future Role of UNCITRAL - Promoting Wider Awareness and
 Acceptance of Uniform Texts /, in / Uniform Commercial Law in the Twenty First
 Century - Proceedings of the Congress of the United Nations Commission on
 International Trade Law / (New York, 1992) pp. 249-259 on p. 252, referred to
 later as / 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress /. See also René David comments
 in / International Encyclopedia of Comparative Law /, Vol. II, Chap. 5
 (Tübingen, 1971) pp. 24 and 25.

 [4]: Ronald Coase, / Industrial Organization: A Proposal for Research / (1972) in
 / The Firm, The Market and the Law / (Chicago, London, 1988) pp. 57-74, comp.
 Coase's Nobel Lecture / The Institutional Structure of Production /, AER 82
 (1992) pp. 713-719. For a web site inspired by the work of Coase see / The
 Center for Research on Contracts and the Structure of Enterprise / at the Katz
 School, University of Pittsburgh <http://crcse.business.pitt.edu/> also the /
 New Institutional Economics Network / <http://sykuta.business.pitt.edu/nie/>

 [5]: For an introduction to the different approaches to law and economics see
 Nicholas Mercuro and Steven Medema, / Schools of Thought in Law and Economics:
 A Kuhnian Competition / in Robin Malloy and Christopher Brown (ed.) / Law and
 Economics New and Critical Perspectives / (New York, 1995) pp. 65-123.

 [6]: See Michael Trebilcock, / The Limits of Freedom of Contract / (Harvard,
 1993).

 [7]: Discussed very briefly in section 2.3.4 of this paper in relation to
 protective principles.

 [8]: Which is pursued by Wisconsin University and Michigan State University.
 Mercuro and Medema (1995) pp. 65-123 at pp. 95-108.

 [9]: The concept of the autonomous contract becomes attractive when looked upon
 as the collective embodiment of elusive characteristics that the business
 community seeks upon which to base their transactions, and includes:
 harmonisation, transnationalism and a-nationalism for our purposes insofar as
 it furthers the other two objectives.

 [10]: An a-national uniform transnational legal framework for contracts that is
 independent of, but supported by governments.

 [11]: Though parties can "legislate" an extensively autonomous contact, they
 cannot "legislate" a contract that is entirely. Areas such as "validity" are
 defined differently within different jurisdictions, and international
 contracts can be subject to laws on currency control; export and import
 control; hazardous substances; antitrust | competition rules; anti-boycott;
 anti-bribery, etc. Similarly, mandatory rules on such matters as good faith,
 fair dealing, unconscionability, fraud, duress, extortion, interest, penalty
 clauses, etc. In specialised fields, such as consumer contracts, contracts
 with local sales representatives and specialised industries, such as banking
 and insurance, one also encounters national laws that parties cannot modify by
 their contract "legislation". See also article by Jan Ramberg / Autonomy of
 Contract and Non-Mandatory Law / in / Scandinavian Studies in Law (1993) / pp.
 141-149.

 [12]: Criteria for selection might include: familiarity; application of uniform
 law; neutrality; reputation; language; and convenience.

 [13]: Similar criteria to choice of law in addition to which include: appropriate
 enforcement treaties; location.

 [14]: E.g. Thomas Wilhelmsson, / Legal Integration as Disintegration of National
 Law / in / Legal Polycentricity - Consequences of Pluralism in Law / (1995)
 pp. 127-147 on p. 128.

 [15]: E.g. arbitration law (different arbitration statutes), electronic commerce
 (the validity of electronic documents and signatures), or sale of goods law
 (England and Japan do not apply the / CISG /) for example. Also see comment by
 Charles Brower, in the arbitration panel, / Are International Institutions
 Doing Their Job? - The American Society of International Law, Proceedings of
 the 90th Annual Meeting, 1996 / (Washington D.C. 1996) p. 249.

 [16]: E.g. / EC, NAFTA, ASEAN /.

 [17]: / De jure / if not / de facto /.

 [18]: See William W. Park, / International forum selection / (Hague, 1995).

 [19]: Regional efforts with their frequently associated political objectives are
 outside the scope of this paper.

 [20]: See Roy Goode, / Reflections on the Harmonisation of Commercial Law / in /
 Uniform Law Review / (1991) pp. 54-74 for a more detailed account of the
 alternatives and related considerations.

 [21]: E.g. / UN Model Law on Arbitration 1985 /; / UN Model Law on Electronic
 Commerce 1996 /.

 [22]: The International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome,
 <http://www.agora.stm.it/unidroit/> also
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/papers/unidroit.html>

 [23]: / UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts / (Rome, 1994)
 text of the principles and accompanying commentary; Joachim Bonell, / An
 international restatement of contract law: the UNIDROIT principles of
 international commercial contracts / (New York, 1994); and / UNIDROIT
 Principles for International Commercial Contracts: A New Lex Mercatoria? /
 (Paris, 1995) referred to later as / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex
 Mercatoria? / The black letter text of the / Principles / are on the Internet
 at <http://www.agora.stm.it/unidroit/english/principles/pr-main.htms> and
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/doc/Unidroit.Contract.Principles.1994.html>

 [24]: John Honnold, / Goals of unification - Process and value of the unification
 of commercial law: lessons for the future drawn from the past 25 years /
 (1992) in / 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress /, pp. 11-13, p. 11.

 [25]: United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, Vienna,
 <http://www.un.or.at/uncitral> also
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/papers/UNCITRAL.html>

 [26]: / United Nations Convention On Contracts For The International Sale Of
 Goods (1980) /. See Honnold, / Uniform Law for International Sales, Under the
 1980 United Nations Convention / (Philadelphia, 1991); Fritz Enderlein and
 Dietrich Maskow, / International Sales Law, United Nations Convention on
 Contracts for the International Sale of Good... / (1992); Kritzer, /
 International Contract Manual: Guide to Practical Applications of the United
 Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods / (1994)
 and the / CISG W3 Database /, Institute of International Commercial Law, Pace
 University School of Law <http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu/> For some general
 links <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/nav/sales.html>

 [27]: Ernst Rabel, / Das Recht des Warenkaufs / Bd. I&II (Berlin, 1936-1958). Two
 volume study on sales law.

 [28]: Cornell Project on Formation of Contracts 1968 - Rudolf Schlesinger, /
 Formation of Contracts. A study of the Common Core of Legal Systems /, 2 vols.
 (New York, London 1968). Arthur von Mehren (ed.), / International Encyclopedia
 of Comparative Law / - Konrad Zweigert, including an agenda for national
 reports and general reports on various issues of contract law from formation
 to termination. For more information see Erich Schanze, New Directions in
 Business Research in Børge Dahl & Ruth Nielsen (ed.), / New Directions in
 Contract Research / (Copenhagen, 1996) pp. 61-90, on p. 61.

 [29]: / Uniform Law on the Formation of Contracts for the International Sale of
 Goods / (/ ULF /) and the / Convention relating to a Uniform Law on the
 International Sale of Goods / (/ ULIS /) The Hague, 1964.

 [30]: László Réczei, / Process and value of the unification of commercial law:
 lessons for the future drawn from the past 25 years / (1992) in /
 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress /, pp. 5-7, on p. 6.

 [31]: The / CISG / for example covers international sale of goods of specific
 types not those listed under Article 2; and specifically excludes its
 application to factors that vitiate a contract and the passing of property
 under Article 4.

 [32]: E.g. / ICC's Incoterms / (1990) and contract clauses on / Hardship and
 Force Majeure /, and recently completed model for various / CISG /
 transactions.

 [33]: Such as the European Council for Europe, / General Conditions for the
 Supply of Plant and Machinery for Export / (Form No. 574) (UN - ECE, 1955);
 The International Federation of (independent) Consulting Engineers, / FIDIC
 Red Book on Construction / (1996); Works of the European trade association /
 Orgalime /.

 [34]: Such as the Grain and Feed Trade Association - / GAFTA /

 [35]: Honnold (1992) on p. 12.

 [36]: Honnold id. p. 13.

 [37]: / CISG / Article 78 - Interest; / UNIDROIT Principles /, Article 7.4.9 -
 "interest for failure to pay money," and Article 7.4.10 - "interest on
 damages."

 [38]: See footnote 23.

 [39]: / The Principles of European Contract Law 1998 / (publication expected in
 1998). Previews of the final text of the / Principles of European Contract Law
 / are available on the Net at <http://www.ufsia.ac.be/~estorme/PECL.html> and
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/doc/EU.Contract.Principles.1997.preview.html>
 Also the earlier edition of the principles and accompanying commentary is
 published: Ole Lando and Hugh Beale (ed.) / Principles of European Contract
 Law, Part I: Performance, Non-performance and Remedies / (1995).

 [40]: Alexander Komarov / Remarks on the Applications of the UNIDROIT Principles
 of International Commercial Contracts in International Commercial Arbitration
 / (1995) in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? / pp. 157-166 on p.
 157; Stewart Hancock / A Uniform Commercial Code for International Sales? We
 Have it Now / in New York State Bar Journal (January, 1995) quoting oral
 statement by Werner Melis to the effect that practically all international
 commercial disputes are settled by arbitration and not before state courts.
 Also see comments by Yasuhei Taniguchi, / The Changing Attitude to
 International Commercial Dispute Settlement in Asia / in / Arbitration and
 Dispute Resolution Law Journal / (London, 1997) pp. 67-77 at pp. 72-73.

 [41]: Dispute resolution is a service industry - with many competing arbitration
 entities, both institutional and freelance, it is sensitive to its market. An
 arbitration tribunal's mandate is determined by the "will" of the contracting
 parties, this extends to the methods and "law" employed by it in dispute
 resolution. Competition exists also on a national level as regards national
 arbitration laws to attract ICA, see Park (Hague, 1995).

 [42]: Attained through state support of the / New York Convention 1958 / (108
 states contracting states) said to be honoured/ effective in 98 per cent of
 cases, see Albert Jan Van Den Berg, / Some practical questions concerning the
 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
 Arbitral Awards / (1992) in / 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress / pp. 212-220
 at p. 213. Also through the subsequent / UN Model Law on Arbitration 1985 /.
 In the important but less generic area of investment disputes were a
 contracting state is a party to the contract, the / ICSID Arbitration Rules /
 have even wider and further reaching effect.

 [43]: Such as / UNCITRAL /.

 [44]: Such as the / ICC's International Court of Arbitration /; / LCIA - London
 Court of International Arbitration /; / AAA - American Arbitration Association
 /.

 [45]: For a brief overview see Sir Michael Kerr, / Concord and Conflict in
 International Arbitration /, in / Arbitration International / (London, LCIA,
 1997) Vol. 13 pp. 121-143.

 [46]: See Allan Redfern and Martin Hunter, / Law and Practice of International
 Commercial Arbitration / (London, 1991) pp. 47-49; and Esa Paasivirta, /
 Participation of States in International Contracts / (Helsinki, 1990).

 [47]: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Mustill, / The New Lex Mercatoria: The First
 Twenty-five Years / in Maarten Bos and Ian Brownlie, Liber Amicorum for the
 Rt. Hon. Lord Wilberforce, Clarendon Press (Oxford, 1987) pp.149-183.

 [48]: See Ole Lando, / The Law Applicable to the Merits of the Dispute /, in
 Julian Lew (ed.) / Contemporary Problems in International Arbitration / (1987)
 pp. 101-112 on p. 104.

 [49]: W. Laurence Craig, William W. Park, Jan Paulsson, / International Chamber
 of Commerce Arbitration / (New York, looseleaf updated, 2nd ed.) p. 640.

 [50]: Lando, / The lex mercatoria in International Commercial Arbitration /, 34
 ICLQ (1985) p. 753. as cited by Komarov (1995) pp. 157-166 on p. 161.

 [51]: Discussions and examples of / lex mercatoria / are to be found in: Berthold
 Goldman, / Frontières du droit et lex mercatoria /, Archives de philosophie
 du droit (Paris 1964); / La lex mercatoria dans les contrats et l'arbitrage
 internationaux: réalité et perspectives /, 106 Culnet Journal du droit
 international (1979) p. 475; / Etudes offèrtes à Berthold Goldman / (Paris
 1982) contributions by Battifol, Kahn, von Mehren, Rigaux, Weil; Cremades and
 Pehn, / The New Lex Mercatoria and the Harmonisation of the Laws of
 International Commercial Transactions / 3 Boston Univ Intl LJ 317 (1984); /
 The applicable Law: General Principles of Law - the Lex Mercatoria / in J. Lew
 (ed.), / Contemporary Problems in International Arbitration / (1986) p. 113; /
 Lex Mercatoria / in Forum Internationale, No.3 (Nov. 1983); Pierre Lalive of
 Switzerland, / Transnational (or Truly International) Public Policy and
 International Arbitration /; Mustill, / The New Lex Mercatoria: The First
 Twenty-five Years /, (Oxford, 1987) pp.149-183; E. Gaillard (ed.), /
 Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration / (Paris, 1993);
 Lando, / Lex mercatoria / 1985-1996 in / Festskrift till Stig Strömholm /,
 Vol. II p. 567-584 (Götenborg, 1997). Also Clive Schmitthoff, / Nature and
 Evolution of the Transnational Law of Commercial Transactions in the
 Transnational law of International Commercial Transactions / in Studies in
 Transnational Economic Law, Vol. 2 (1982) pp. 23-24. See also the / UNIDROIT
 Principles of International Commercial Contracts 1994 / and the / Principles
 Of European Contract Law 1998. /.

 [52]: See Himlar Raeschke-Kessler, / Should an Arbitrator in an International
 Arbitration Procedure apply the UNIDROIT Principles? / (1995) in / UNIDROIT
 Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? /, pp. 167-177 on p. 169 "It is no secret
 that the prevailing opinion among jurists in some countries, like mine, is
 plainly adverse towards an uncodified / lex mercatoria / as an independent
 body of transnational law" and discussion by Ulrich Drobnig, / The Use of the
 UNIDROIT Principles by National and Supranational Courts / (1995) in /
 UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? /, pp. 223-229 on p. 226-227.

 [53]: The / Inter American Convention on the Law Applicable to International
 Contracts 1994 / invites state courts to apply / lex mercatoria /, Article 10.
 This is done in addition to the application of state law. In the absence of
 its selection by the parties the state with the closest ties, Article 9(1).
 Significantly, Article 9(2) provides that the court also take into account the
 general principles of international commercial law recognised by international
 organisations. See Lando (1997) pp. 567-584.

 [54]: Kazuaki Sono, / The Changing Role of UNCITRAL / within / The Future Role of
 UNCITRAL / (1992) in / 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress /, pp. 249-252, on p.
 250. Statement made prior to the / UNIDROIT Principles /, a significant figure
 as pinning down the exact content and effect of use of / lex mercatoria / is
 far from certain.

 [55]: Lando (1997) p. 575. See also / UNIDROIT Principles /, Preamble 4 a. Also
 Arthur Hartkamp, / The Use of UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial
 Contracts by National and Supranational Courts / (1995) in / UNIDROIT
 Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? /, pp. 253-260 on p. 255, notes that "there
 is a growing tendency to permit them to choose 'rules of law' other than
 national laws on which the arbitrators may base their decisions".

 [56]: Innovative and new are the ("Lando" and "Bonell") codifications of contract
 principles / "lex mercatoria" / discussed in the following section. Though
 these may be regarded as being inspired by the / US Restatement of Contract
 Law /.

 [57]: As indicated e.g. by the / European Arbitration Convention 1961 /, /
 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1975 /, / UNCITRAL Model Law 1985 /.

 [58]: Komarov (1995) on p. 163; Hans Van Houtte, / The UNIDROIT Principles of
 International Commercial Contracts and International Commercial Arbitration:
 Their Reciprocal Relevance / (A:1995) in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex
 Mercatoria? /, pp. 181-195 on p. 183.

 [59]: There is no dissent on this from the correspondents of various
 nationalities in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? / E.g. Michael
 Furmston in / The UNIDROIT Principles in International Commercial Arbitration
 / (1995) in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? /, pp. 199-208 on p.
 202; Raeschke-Kessler (1995) p. 170. See also / UNIDROIT Principles /,
 Preamble 4 a. See also Van Houtte (A:1995) p. 183. Apart from the / UNCITRAL
 Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration / (Article 28) specific
 provision permitting the selection of "rules of law" (as opposed merely to
 "the law") is provided in the new / Arbitration Rules / of both the / ICC /
 (Article 17) and / LCIA / (Article 22(2)), both effective from 1 January 1998.

 [60]: See comment by Van Houtte, / International Trade Law / (London, 1995) p.
 28-29 and p. 399 suggests that / lex mercatoria / is too vague and imprecise
 to be "self-sufficient". See the next section of this paper on "general
 contract principles as / lex mercatoria /."

 [61]: Van Houtte (London, 1995) p. 28. Given the uncertainty as to its precise
 scope and application he also suggests that it is safer to apply a given
 system of state law, Van Houtte (London, 1995) p. 412 and p. 399.

 [62]: Mustill (1987) pp.149-183 at pp.152-153.

 [63]: As applied in / Deutsche Schachtbau-und Tiefbohrgesellschaft v. Ras Al
 Khaimah National Oil Co. / [1987] 2 All ER 769. See comment by Komarov (1995)
 on p. 162.

 [64]: See for example Lando (1997) pp. 567-584.

 [65]: Trade usages are actual practices of the relevant business community, the
 existence of which must be established and if necessary proven, e.g. by expert
 witnesses. The trade usage is not a source of law.

 [66]: Mustill (1987) pp.149-183 at pp.174-177.

 [67]: As presented by Jarrod Wiener, / The 'Transnational' Political Economy: A
 Framework for Analysis / (1995) at
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/papers/The.Transnational.Political.Economy.a.Framework.for.Analysis.Jarrod.Wiener.UKC.html>
 For a listing of general principles to be found within the / CISG /, see
 Ulrich Magnus, / Die Allgemeinen Grndsätze im UN-Kaufrecht / / [The General
 Principles of the CISG- in German] /, Rabels Zeitschrift für ausländisches
 und internationales Privatrecht (1995) 469-494. For an english translation of
 this text, see <http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/magnus.html> at the /
 CISG W3 Database /, Institute of International Commercial Law, Pace University
 School of Law.

 [68]: Mustill (1987) pp.149-183 at p. 173.

 [69]: Bonell, / Various Techniques of Unification - Non-legislative means of
 harmonisation / (1992) in / 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress /, pp. 33-40 on
 p. 40.

 [70]: Introduction of the / UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial
 Contracts / (Rome, 1994) p. ix.

 [71]: Id. p. viii.

 [72]: As pointed out, their general nature, and the wide latitude granted
 arbitrators to determine the case, has led to some reservation as to the
 general suitability of their use, see Van Houtte, id. p. 412 and p. 399.

 [73]: Whether so instructed specifically by the parties, or referred to as
 suggested by the Preamble of the / UNIDROIT Principles 1994 /. Comp. Article
 1.101 - Application of the Principles of the / European Principles, European
 Principles 1998 /.

 [74]: The most constraining suggestion being that it is only when the / UNIDROIT
 Principles 1994 / and the / EU Principles 1998 / converge, together with the /
 CISG / that there is a clear indication that they represent the / Lex
 Mercatoria /, see Raeschke-Kessler (1995) on p. 174.

 [75]: Bonell, / The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts and
 the Principles of European Contract Law: Similar Rules for the Same Purpose? /
 in / UNIDROIT Uniform Law Review / (Rome, 1996) pp. 229-246 at pp. 242-243;
 Lando (1997) pp. 567-584 where he states "The / UNIDROIT Principles / are for
 the World ... The / PECL [Principles of European Contract Law] / are for the
 European Union" on p. 572.

 [76]: See Amissah, / On the Net and the Liberation of Information that wants to
 be Free / in / Fra institutt til fakultet, Jubileumsskrift i anledning av at
 IRV ved Universitetet i Tromsø feirer 10 år og er blitt til Det juridiske
 fakultet / (Tromsø, 1996) pp. 59-76 or the same at
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/papers/On.the.Net.and.Information.17.02.1997.Amissah.d.html>

 [77]: See Bonell (1996) on pp. 230-231.

 [78]: Bonell, / The UNIDROIT principles of International commercial contracts:
 Why? What? How? / in Børge Dahl & Ruth Nielsen (ed.), (1996) pp. 91-98 on p.
 93 and in id. (1997) on p. 231, comments on sources of inspiration mentioning
 diverse sources including (articles combined) the United States / Uniform
 Commercial Code and the Restatement (Second) of the law of Contracts /, the
 drafts of the / Dutch Civil Code 1992 /, the / Civil Code of Quebec 1994 /,
 also the / Foreign Economic Contract Law of the Peoples Republic of China 1985
 /, and the / Algerian Civil Code of 1975 /. The international instrument
 referred to is the / CISG /. Also to non-legislative instruments such as
 Incoterms, the UCP, FIDIC Red book, and various works by / UNCITRAL /.

 [79]: Van Houtte, / The UNIDROIT Principles as a Guide to Drafting Contracts /
 (B:1995) in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? / pp. 115-125 on p.
 118.

 [80]: Jérôme Huet, / Synthesis / (1995) in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex
 Mercatoria? / pp. 273-281 on p. 278 and p. 281.

 [81]: Supra footnote 74.

 [82]: J. Carver, / Uniform law and its impact on business circles: the experience
 of the legal profession /, in / UNIDROIT / (ed.), / International Uniform Law
 in Practice / (N.Y., 1988) p. 411. see also Bonell (1992) p. 39.

 [83]: Honnold, / Documentary History of the Uniform Law for International Sales /
 (1989) para. 19 on p. 256.

 [84]: Article 1.7, Comment 2. Also see Van Houtte (A:1995), p. 186.

 [85]: See Allan Farnsworth, / An American View to the Principles as a Guide to
 Drafting Contracts / in / UNIDROIT Principles: A New Lex Mercatoria? / pp.
 85-92 on p. 87.

 [86]: Farnsworth id. as an example points out Article 6.1.4(2) does not reflect
 commercial practice.

 [87]: E.g. the / ICC's Force Majeure and Hardship clauses /.

 [88]: Van Houtte (A:1995), p. 185.

 [89]: Also consider present and future possibilities for such use of / The
 Principles / under / CISG / articles 8 and 9.

 [90]: Special principles have precedence over general ones. See Huet, / Synthesis
 / (1995) p. 277.

 [91]: Drobnig, id. p. 228, comment that the / CISG / precludes recourse to
 general principles of contract law in Article 7. This does not refer to the
 situation where parties determine that the / UNIDROIT Principles / should do
 so, see / CISG / Article 6.

 [92]: Vivien Gaymer, / The UNIDROIT Principles as a Guide for Drafting Contracts:
 A View from an International Commercial Lawyer /, in / UNIDROIT Principles: A
 New Lex Mercatoria? / pp. 97-102 on p. 100.

 [93]: Sono (1992) p. 250.

 [94]: Furmston (1995) p. 202, provides the compelling examples of two such
 agreements involving * (i) * the construction and * (ii) * the operation of
 the Channel Tunnel by Anglo-French consortiums. Both agreed upon disputes
 being "governed by those Principles of English and French contract law which
 are common and, if were no relevant common principles, by general principles
 of international commercial law." Dispute resolution to be by / ICC /
 arbitration in Brussels.

 [95]: Special problem regarding common/shared resources discussed by Garrett
 Hardin in / Science / (1968) 162 pp. 1243-1248. For short discussion and
 summary see Trebilcock, (1993) p. 13-15.

 [96]: Hugh Collins, / The Law of Contract / (London, 1986) p. 160; Lars Erik
 Taxell, / Avtalsrättens normer / (Turku, 1987) p. 11; cited by Wilhelmsson, /
 Questions for a Critical Contract Law - and a Contradictory Answer: Contract
 as Social Cooperation / in Wilhelmsson (ed.), / Perspectives of Critical
 Contract Law / (1993) pp. 9-52 on p. 20.

 [97]: There are other protective provisions in the form of: hardship (Chapter 6,
 Section 2); surprising terms (2.20); duty of confidentiality (2.16); and
 negotiation in bad faith (2.15). The principles also have specific provisions
 on: fraud (3.8); threat (3.9) gross disparity (3.10); and mistake (3.4, 3.5).

 [98]: Gaymer (1995) p. 97 states "I particularly noted Article 1.7, which
 requires each party to act in accordance with good faith and fair dealing.
 This is not a general principle of English contract law, nor can it be readily
 achieved under that law and I am interested to learn more about its perceived
 application and benefits." The US has come further than England with the
 development of the doctrine of unconscionability, and in basing the Uniform
 Commercial Code on the principle of good faith, which is hailed as its "single
 most important concept" and as "the foundation on which the [UCC] was
 drafted", citations to Dore and DeFranco from Albert Kritzer, International
 Contract Manual: Guides to Practical Applications of the / CISG / (looseleaf
 1994) p. 74. See also the / Official UCC Commentary /, Section 1-203.

 [99]: Supra 2.3.2. in e§39.

 [100]: / UNIDROIT Contract Principles /, General provisions - Article 1.7 Each
 party must act in accordance with good faith and fair dealing in international
 trade. (2) The parties may not exclude or limit this liability. / EU Contract
 Principles /, General Obligations - Article 1.201 (ex art. 1.106) - Good faith
 and fair dealing: "(1) Each party must act in accordance with good faith and
 fair dealing. (2) The parties may not exclude or limit this duty." Good faith
 and fair dealing is also to be found in several national contract law systems,
 if not the English and "American". Generally see Lando, / Each Contracting
 Party Must Act In Accordance with Good Faith and Fair Dealing / in /
 Festskrift til Jan Ramberg / (Stockholm, 1997) pp. 345-361.

 [101]: Roger Brownsword, / Towards a Rational Law of Contract / in Wilhelmsson
 (ed.), / Perspectives of Critical Contract Law / (1993) pp. 241-272 on p. 241.
 Furmston (1995) on p. 201 notes: "It is recognised that even between
 commercial parties there may be stronger and weaker parties" in discussing
 Article 3.10 of the / UNIDROIT Principles /.

 [102]: Apart from the more straightforward cases of different types of
 misrepresentation.

 [103]: Trebilcock, (1993) p. 102, followed by a quotation of Milton Friedman,
 from / Capitalism and Freedom / (1962) p. 13.

 [104]: Trebilcock, (1993) p. 102, note quoted passage of Kim Lane Scheppele, /
 Legal Secrets: Equality and Efficiency in the Common Law / (1988) p. 25.

 [105]: On the loyalty principle generally see L.E. Taxell, / Avtalsträtt /
 (Stockholm, 1997). For a critical opinion on the principle of loyalty see
 Ernst Nordtveit, / Partnerskap ved utveksling av ytingar. Realitet eller
 illusjon / in / Lov og Rett / (1996) p. 337.

 [106]: Ian Macneil, / Barriers to the Idea of Relational Contracts /, in F.
 Nicklisch (ed.), / Der komplexe Langzeitvertrag / (Heidelberg, 1987) 31-49, at
 35.

 [107]: Stewart Macaulay, / Non-Contractual Relations in Business a Preliminary
 Study /, in / American Sociological Review / (1963) pp. 55-67 on p. 61.

 [108]: Writing on EC law Hans-W. Micklitz, / Principles of Justice in Private Law
 within the European Union / pp. 259-258 at pp. 284.290, discusses the concept
 of "legitimate expectations" as having the potential to cover similar ground
 in a more constructive manner as being as yet without national connotations it
 may be easier to achieve/develop an internationally uniform definition and
 interpretation.

 [109]: Wilhelmsson, / Legal Polycentricity: Consequences of Pluralism in Law /
 (1995) pp.127-147 on p. 131.

 [110]: Secured as required by relevant conditions precedent and contractual
 guarantee.

 [111]: Under the / New York Convention 1958 /, / UNCITRAL Model Law on
 Arbitration 1985 / and arbitration laws that have been influenced by it.

 [112]: Huet (1995) p. 278 and p. 281.

 [113]: For more detailed reading see Goode (1991) pp. 54-74. For an English law
 perspective on uniform statutes see F.A. Mann, / Uniform Statutes in English
 Law / in P.V. Baker (ed.) / The Law Quarterly Review / (London, 1983) Vol. 99
 pp. 376-406.

 [114]: Lando (1987) p. 111.

 [115]: Ronald Dworkin, / Laws Empire / (Harvard, 1986); / Hard Cases / in /
 Harvard Law Review / (1988). For a short summary see Wayne Morrison, /
 Jurisprudence: from the Greeks to post-modernism / (London, 1997) pp. 415-448.

 [116]: E.g. / pacta sunt servanda / and the narrow / clausula rebus sic stantibus
 /.

 [117]: E.g. / pacta sunt servanda / and good faith under the / UNIDROIT / and /
 EU Principles / and their interpretation clauses.

 [118]: Honnold (1992) p. 11.

 [119]: In the common law system based on the earlier authoritative legal
 reasoning of binding precedent and persuasive authority.

 [120]: Word coined by John Horgan in / The End of Science / (London, 1996) to
 cover the related fields of chaos and complexity. Chaos theory is a branch of
 mathematics and physics. Sometimes described as the edge of chaos, what is
 studied here is not randomness or disorder. Chaoplexity examines non-linear
 systems in which simple sets of deterministic rules can lead to highly
 complicated (detailed) results, which cannot be predicted accurately. A good
 introduction to the subject chaos is provided by James Gleick, / Chaos: Making
 a New Science / (New York, 1987).

 [121]: Such as those provided by Dworkin in explaining the application of rules
 and principles (to determine judicial outcomes).

 [122]: Hugh Collins, / European Private Law and Cultural Identity of States / in
 / European Review of Private Law / 3 (1995) pp. 353 at 356, 357-58, citation
 used by Christian Joerges, / The Process of European Integration and the
 'Denationalization' of Private Law / in Børge Dahl & Ruth Nielsen (ed.),
 (1996) pp. 73-90, p. 82.

 [123]: Herbert Briggs, / The Law of Nations; Cases, Documents and Notes / (New
 York, 1952) on p. 897.

 [124]: Lord Diplock in / Fothergill v Monarch Airlines / [1981], A.C. 251, 282 or
 see
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/papers/England.Fothergill.v.Monarch.Airlines.HL.1980.html#ecs85>.
 Also Mann (London, 1983) at p. 379.

 [125]: And other international organisations such as / UNIDROIT / - footnote
 added.

 [126]: Réczei (1992), p. 6.

 [127]: Examples: / The United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
 International Sale of Goods / 1980, Article 7; / The UNIDROIT Principles of
 International Commercial Contracts / 1994, Article 1.6; / The Principles of
 European Contract Law / 1998</i> Article 1.106; / The United Nations
 Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea (The Hamburg Rules) / 1978, Article
 3; / The United Nations Convention on the Limitation Period in the
 International Sale of Goods / 1974 and 1978, Article 7; / UN Model Law on
 Electronic Commerce / 1996, Article 3; / UNIDROIT Convention on International
 Factoring / 1988, Article 4; / UNIDROIT Convention on International Financial
 Leasing / 1988¸ Article 6; also / EC Convention on the Law Applicable to
 Contractual Obligations / 1980, Article 18.

 [128]: Honnold, / Uniform words and uniform applications. Uniform Words and
 Uniform Application: The 1980 Sales Convention and International Juridical
 Practice in Einheitliches Kaufrecht und nationales Obligationenrecht /.
 Referate Diskussionen der Fachtagung. am 16/17-2-1987, hrsg. von Peter
 Schlechtriem (Baden-Baden, 1987) pp. 115-147.

 [129]: Under Article 7. See also footnote 126.

 [130]: To take account of its international nature and the need to promote
 uniformity in international trade.

 [131]: For an example based on the probable international treatment of Norway's
 singular and controversial transformation of the / CISG / see Viggo Hagstrøm,
 / Kjøpsrettskonvensjon, Norsk Kjøpslov og Internasjonal Rettsenhet / in
 Tidsskrift for Rettsvitenskap (1995) pp. 561-588 on p. 569 and Joseph
 Lookofsky, / Understanding the CISG in Scandinavia / (Copenhagen, 1996) on p.
 5, 13, and 105. Compare Kai Krüger's argument in / Komparativ rettsmetode -
 observasjoner vedrørende prinsipper for rettsanvendelse i Europa nord og sør
 - illustrert ved tilfellet Norge og Italia / in Jussens Venner (1996) pp.
 281-312 on p. 312.

 [132]: For further information on such projects and information sources, see ITL
 the / International Trade Law Monitor / by Amissah at
 <http://itl.irv.uit.no/trade_law/>

 [133]: Coming as they do from different: states; genre of writing; sources and
 levels of authority.

 [134]: / UNCITRAL / Secretariat (1992) p. 253. Proposed by David (France) at the
 second / UNCITRAL / Congress and on later occasions put forward by Farnsworth
 (USA). For references on interpretation of the / CISG / by a supranational
 committee of experts or council of "wise men" see Bonell, / Proposal for the
 Establishment of a Permanent Editorial Board for the Vienna Sales Convention
 /, in / International Uniform Law in Practice/Le droit uniforme international
 dans la pratique [Acts and Proceedings of the 3<sup>rd</sup> Congress on
 Private Law held by the International Institute for the Unification of Private
 law / (Rome 7-10 September 1987)], (New York, 1988) pp. 241-244; and Drobnig,
 / Observations / in / Uniform Law in Practice /, / supra. / at p. 306.

 [135]: / UNCITRAL / Secretariat, id.

 [136]: / UNCITRAL / Secretariat, id.

 [137]: / UNCITRAL / Secretariat, id. p. 258.

 [138]: Sono (1992) p. 251. The suggestion by Louis Sohn found in, / Uniform laws
 require uniform interpretation: proposals for an international tribunal to
 interpret uniform legal texts / (1992) in / 25<sup>th</sup> UNCITRAL Congress
 /, pp. 50-54.

 [139]: / UNCITRAL / Secretariat, id.

 [140]: Which is not the same as to suggest that the idea would be new. As Goode
 points out "Truly there is nothing new under the sun. Nearly two thousand
 years have elapsed since Cicero proclaimed the virtues of legal
 harmonisation", see Goode (1991) p. 54.

 [141]: Robert Hillman, / CISG Cross Reference and Editorial Analysis: Article 7 /
 in / CISG W3 Database /, Institute of International Commercial Law, Pace
 University School of Law (New York, September 1997)
 <http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu/cisg/text/hillman.html>

 [142]: It should be noted that whilst electronic media makes such a solution more
 practicable and attractive, the same thing is achieved through the age-old
 tradition of incorporation by reference.

 [143]: John Robert Cassidy Mahwah, / An Undergraduate Course in Comparative Legal
 Studies / in / Rechtstheorie Zeitschrift für Logik, Methodenlehre Kybernetik
 und Soziologie des Rechts, Beiheft 12 Monistic or Pluralistic Legal Culture? /
 Ed. Peter Sack, Carl Wellman, Mitsukunk Yasaki (Berlin, 1987) pp. 200-207 on
 p. 205. See also footnote 3 of this text.

 [144]: / United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
 Arbitral Awards New York, 1958 /, Article II. The convention is available off
 ITL.

 [145]: Noted in the / European Initiative on Electronic Commerce / (1997) §45.
 "A number of Member States' rules governing the formation and the performance
 of contracts are not appropriate for an electronic commerce environment and
 are generating uncertainties relating to the validity and enforceability of
 electronic contracts (for example the requirements for written documents, for
 hand written signatures, or the rules of evidence that do not take into
 account electronic documents)..."
 <http://www.cordis.lu/esprit/src/ecomcomx.htm>

 [146]: / US Framework for Global Electronic Commerce / (1997)
 <http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/New/Commerce/>

 [147]: / UNCITRAL / Secretariat (1992) p. 255.

 [148]: Schanze (1996) p. 62.

 [149]: Lalive, / International Arbitration - Teaching and Research / in Julian
 Lew (ed.), / Contemporary Problems in International Arbitration / (1987) at p.
 18, quoting statement by Goode.

 [150]: Regionalisation may be a step towards internationalisation, but is not the
 same thing, and the subsequent step does not necessarily follow.

 [151]: See Lalive, id. reference to Goode and the Institute of International Law,
 Teaching of International Law, 1987 Committee chaired by Zourek.

 [152]: Report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, / Progressive
 Development of the Law of International Trade / (1966). Report prepared for
 the UN by C. Schmitthoff.

 [153]: The Institute of International Commercial Law, Pace University School of
 Law, is engaged in the various activities mentioned in this paragraph with
 regard to the / CISG /.

==============================================================================

	Title:  The Autonomous Contract - Reflecting the borderless
               electronic-commercial environment in contracting

	Creator:  Ralph Amissah

	Rights:  Copyright (C)[Ralph Amissah]

	Subject:  international contracts, international commercial arbitration,
               private international law

	Publisher:  SiSU http://www.jus.uio.no/sisu (this copy)

	Sourcefile:  the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah.sst

	Filetype:  SiSU text 2.0

	Source digest:  SHA256(the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah.sst)=
               c62b93978c10324392c55c8790b9ae56bd9e4da662b83bb05565733d93e31296

	Skin digest:  SHA256(skin_lm.rb)=
               5acda64a9532f9ef6b71693da2b471d4efac2f23a8499e68de066eec8ea9b8e9

	Generated by:  Generated by: SiSU 2.6.3 of 2010w30/3 (2010-07-28)

	Ruby version:  ruby 1.8.7 (2010-08-16 patchlevel 302) [i486-linux]

	Document (dal) last generated:  Tue Sep 21 17:35:36 -0400 2010

==============================================================================

Other versions of this document:
manifest:
   http://www.jus.uio.no/lm//the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah/sisu_manifest.html
html:
   http://www.jus.uio.no/lm//the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah/toc.html
pdf:
   http://www.jus.uio.no/lm//the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah/portrait.pdf
   http://www.jus.uio.no/lm//the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah/landscape.pdf
plaintext (plain text):
   http://www.jus.uio.no/lm//the.autonomous.contract.07.10.1997.amissah/plain.txt
at:
   http://lexmercatoria.org
* Generated by: SiSU 2.6.3 of 2010w30/3 (2010-07-28)
* Ruby version: ruby 1.8.7 (2010-08-16 patchlevel 302) [i486-linux]
* Last Generated on: Tue Sep 21 17:35:41 -0400 2010
* SiSU http://www.sisudoc.org/
